[Gustaf Tadaa] Välkommen tillbaka till På Jobbet-podden and this week we're gonna switch to English because we're meeting with Elle Miller who is a leader within the services team at Slack. And we're gonna go on a wild exploration of how humans are affected by technology and if the technology is serving us or if we're serving the technology. Elle, welcome!

[Elle Miller] Thank you, Gustaf. It's, it's really good to be here.

[Gustaf Tadaa] So glad to have you here from-- straight from San Francisco. This, the-- Yes, we can now interview people all over the world because of the pandemic, like forced everyone online, and now we can have our guest from anywhere.

[Elle Miller] Yeah. It's, it's a hopefully once in a lifetime opportunity to, to experience this transition, but it-- there are, there are some gifts of COVID, and this is certainly one of them.

[Gustaf Tadaa] You work at Slack. Describe what do you do.

[Elle Miller] I am a leader in the services team at Slack. Uh, we, we're, we are w-within customer success, and so when an enterprise customer is adopting Slack or looking to mature on the platform, my team provides, uh, paid consulting services to, um, make sure that they are getting the most out of their, their licenses and that they're able to, uh, transform their organizations in the, in the ways they want to as they're using the Slack platform.

[Gustaf Tadaa] So, so you're really working like in that space between the Sl- w-between the digital tool and kind of culture and organizational development and how those kind of integrate.

[Elle Miller] That's exactly right. Yeah. It's, it's focused on, uh, how human behavior and how organizational behavior intersect with technology, and we-- fundamentally we, we look at, uh, that question of d-do we shape technology as humans or, or does the technology shape how we, how we work? Um-

[Gustaf Tadaa] Can you answer that question?

[Elle Miller] Our... Well- ... I think, I think there are, there are many valid perspectives to, to that question, but my, my fundamental thesis is, uh, my, my team seeks to make sure that at the, at the launch of Slack, the users know where to go and what to do. That is, that is the day one success story. And so we seek to follow Conway's Law when we implement Slack. And, and Conway's Law is the idea-- it, it points to the idea that an organization's software systems mirror the organizational structure that they were designed in or designed for. So we implement Slack to follow the company's existing ways of working. So we impact where work gets done on, on this single pane of glass in Slack. We impact how work is getting done on the platform. But we're not, we're not necessarily touching the company's why or, or what is being done. And so in that way, we have a significant impact on the behavioral elements of the company, um, but we're also limiting the amount of change that, that users are undergoing when, when we implement the platform.

[Gustaf Tadaa] Mm-hmm. Interesting. So, so if you're, you are following and you're listening in to the existing organizational structure and culture, uh, are, are there s- are there cultures that are more conducive to Slack? Like what, what kind of culture works really well with Slack, and, and what cultures do you have more friction?

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm. Cultures-- th-that's a, that's a great question. It-- Any, any time there is change presented to, to a culture, uh, whether it's, it's the change in how we communicate or, or another organizational change, cultures that have internal flexibility are, are going to be more immediately successful.

[Gustaf Tadaa] Mm.

[Elle Miller] I think cultures that have power structures devoted to, um, uh, uh, for example, uh, communication mediums like, like email, um, those cultures have a harder time understanding the value proposition of Slack because it's, it's so much greater than a chat tool. It is often described that way, but it, it is a, it is a platform where integrations and workflows and deep automations can happen to make it so that a, a company is working on a single pane of glass on Slack. Companies that are used to sending memos, um, cultures that, that are a, a top-down power structure often struggle a bit more in, in my experience, um, to, to fully adopt the power of Slack because it is inherently a democratizing force. Yeah.

[Gustaf Tadaa] Yeah. And, and, and because, because I've seen those who start using Slack and immediately start, uh, private group threads just to keep it-

[Elle Miller] Mm

[Gustaf Tadaa] ...in the-- which, which is how-- kind of missing the point, right? That, uh, uh, because there is a, there is an inherent transparency in using that tool and-

[Elle Miller] There is. It, it-- We, we provide coaching wh-when, when we're implementing Slack. Uh, my, my team provides enablement coaching. Um, there are-- there's, there's of course the, the technical advisory. There's setting up the platform.Um, but the, the bulk of the work and, and some of the most meaningful work is, is in the experience consulting and the enablement and learning that we provide where our specialists go in and partner with, with the customer to say, "Okay, how can we map and how can we create a map of, of the way you get work done, um, in, in the real world?" Which is now such a blurred line in- ... in our remote context. And, and we then create channel strategies and provide advisory on, uh, grid design, uh, to understand and, and then to mirror how we want the Slack platform to, to follow the organizational structure. And so there is, there is a place for private group threads. There-- Uh, multi-person DMs and DMs exist for a reason and, and those features persist for a reason. But we have a-- Our, our specialists will provide, um, advisory, you know, around what's, what's the ideal ratio for your specific situation, um, around how many channels you should have, uh, what should be the ratio of channels to, to DMs, and then customer success will continue to monitor that over time and provide guidance around, um, what, what levers we might pull if we're seeing that there's maybe a, a department using MP- using multi-person direct messages when they could be channelizing that information. Slac- Slack is an acronym for Searchable Log of All Communications and Knowledge, and when we have m- messaging and communications primarily i-isolated into private channels or private, private DMs, uh, we often provide guidance around how to, how to pull some of that content out into the public space, and that's where some of the organizational change happens because companies that are privatized and, and where those power structures, uh, lay in, in private conversations, that, that has to change for Slack to be inherently effective as a tool.

[Maria Göthe] Mm-hmm.

[Gustaf Tadaa] Uh, brilliant, and that, that is the transition from email to a more open tool 'cause the, the email is, is that these, like, secret private rooms that n-no one knows exist. Like, no one in the organization, no matter where you are in the organization, can even know that the conversation is ongoing unless you are in it. And, and that makes-

[Elle Miller] Exactly

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... that makes it so hard, uh, to get the right people in the right place. It makes it so hard for onboarding 'cause you don't get invited to the right th-th-the email threads you should be invited to. So that, that, like, p-pulling out the private into the open is, is such a key, uh, digitalization move when you restructure in internal communication.

[Elle Miller] It is, and, and I'll touch on a, a few of those points. On-onboarding being a, a huge one. I, I think one of the greatest impacts of Slack might be for new joiners when there-- On day one, there is a far more symmetrical access available to information.

[Gustaf Tadaa] Mm-hmm.

[Elle Miller] It is a... It, it, it changes the-- it changes some of the power dynamics there where when, when a person is, is new, whether they came in through, you know, a, a referral or, or how-however they came into the organization and, and at whatever level, suddenly everything is searchable, and there-- a-and no matter who your, who your mentor is or who, who you're assigned, you know, in, in the, in the journey of onboarding, whatever the company does, the, the person has the ability to reach out, um, to understand the, like, the history of this account in the account channel or, or whatever it is that they're looking to onboard. That, that turns a lot of the, uh, inherent power dynamics on its head, um, where we talk about, um, oftentimes m-minorities and women in the workforce needing, uh, a, a, a sponsor or a mentor in order to have similar success to, to the traditional power brokers of an organization. Um, Slack doesn't solve that problem, but I think it could be part of the solution in, in, as I said, making that information more, more symmetrically accessible. And, and yeah, the, the other thing I would share around email, a-as you said, e-email is... E-email follows the same metadata as, a-as the metadata found in parchment paper. It, it-- Fundamentally, it's to, from, subject, and then the body text. And so when we think about shifting the, the method of communication into threaded dialogue in a public channel, it's crazy h- what a, what a leap that represents where we're, we're moving far from just digitizing a memo or, or a postcard where, you know, o-on day one you have to be forwarded all of this information, and what if someone forgets or, you know, there, there's all this human error to be found in the system. Slack takes the agency and puts it in the hand of the person searching for the information.

[Gustaf Tadaa] Mm-hmm.

[Maria Göthe] So how do you, um, work at Slack with your own internal communication? Uh, or do you, do you practice what you preach?

[Elle Miller] Yeah. Thank you for that question. S-Slack, Slack conducts its business on Slack. I, I check my email about once every three days, and there are-- There's, there's obvious- be-because I'm... And, and that, that's flexible. Because I'm outward facing, uh, and, and I have customers who I-- m-my, my main point of contact is customers who are outside of my organization seeking tomodernize the way they, they work on Slack. I still communicate with some customers via email, but far and wide, I, I'm communicating with, with my clients on the platform through Slack Connect, which, uh, which allows multi-organization connections, u-up to 100 organizations to connect in a channel. Uh, and I certainly... A-all of my communication with my colleagues at Slack and at Salesforce is done on, on the Slack platform. We have, uh, I've, uh... There's, there's of course different levels of, of the Slack instances. Um, we're using Slack Grid, so you can have multiple workspaces, uh, available to you where... And, and the messages and channels can, can easily, um, interoperate between those workspaces. It is, it is often that I, I use examples of how Slack is using Slack when I'm talking to my customers in order to provide examples and, and vision for what's possible.

[speaker_3] Mm-hmm.

[Gustaf Tadaa] So, so, uh, if, if you speak about that more culturally, like how does your use of Slack within Slack affect and drive and build the culture within Slack?

[Elle Miller] Yeah. There, uh... Well, I, I'll, I'll speak to my onboarding experience as an example. I, I was one of those, you know, in-increasing in ratio, uh, every day. I was one of those who onboarded to Slack during the pandemic, and so that was... I, I, I w- I was not sure how that experience would, would go for me. Slack was particularly tuned, uh, for the, for working in a remote context. Um, a-again, in that way that the, the platform, uh, enabled cultural inclusion, uh, as, as a remote on-border, and I think the technology has, has impacted and shaped the culture as well. So there, there is of course, there is the, um, social channels I, that I joined. I, I joined, uh, you know, ch- the, the trail runners group, and I joined, you know, the, the random channel for my team. Um, there is the humorous, you know, social yelling channel where you, you only type in all caps. Uh, and that's... That, that, that was particularly popular during the, the, the depths of the pandemic when people wanted to express themselves. Um, but then but then as well, there, there are the, um, private, the, the, the private and public channels that, uh, I used to understand how to get my job done. I could go back and either, either search or just simply scroll to find templates and examples of how my colleagues, um, had communicated a certain, a certain need, request, or, or submitted information so that we could continue forward in, in scoping a deal or, you know, do-doing the work that we do. And so I immediately had modeling, um, in the digital space that I historically would've had to ask for. I would've had to say, "Hey, could I come to this meeting?" or, "Can I see your email template?" Um, but instead I, I had it available to me, um, in, in that remote context, and that was, that was really empowering for me.

[Gustaf Tadaa] So you, you mentioned the shifting power dynamics. You used that expression. Uh, and yeah, so one shifting power dynamic of using a tool like Slack is that, uh, the new people, uh, get more power quicker, right? And that can be potentially upsetting for some within an organization. Um, what other shifting power dynamics happen when you start using a, uh, a Slack or a tool like Slack?

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm. I, I would say Slack is a tool where power gets challenged because it democratizes. It inherently democratizes the f- the flow of information, and we have examples of this where, uh, especially 2020 and, and beyond, where there have been these Slack division, Slacktivism issues. Uh, it's, it's where within, within companies that are, that are heavily on Slack, there are channels created, um, related to, um, diversity and inclusion issues, uh, pay equity, uh, a-and, and et cetera. That has in, that, that has created, um, some, some cultural turmoil at, at various companies. It is a place where we can give perhaps proper space to, to these issues that, that need to see daylight in order to find resolution.

[speaker_3] Mm-hmm.

[Elle Miller] And, and I think that is a, a, a worthy point to make because when we implement Slack, we, we and, and we the users have a, a, an ability to inform the norms of d- of power dynamics because so much of power is found in the control of information flow. At, at the same time, in balance, Slack is a tool where power gets challenged, but I would argue that the existing powers use it eventually to maintain power over time because that's what power seeks to do. And so Slack is like, like most things, Slack is what you make of it. Um, there, there is... I, I find in certain cultures, cul- corporate cultures when we're implementing Slack, companies that want-To exist transparently. Companies that have a culture of, uh, diversity, inclusion, idea-sharing, and, uh, even, even team selling instead of the kind of competitive selling, they thrive on Slack because they want to facilitate the transparency of information. There are certainly ways to, to ma- it's-- to, to maintain the power structures in Slack and, and that's where you have, uh, features like only certain people can post in this, in this very large channel or, um, or, or the-

[Gustaf Tadaa] Yeah, just, just shifting the-

[Elle Miller] ... Slack bots

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... shifting the ratio of private to public channels, right? Like how-

[Elle Miller] Absolutely

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... that is a factor, yeah.

[Elle Miller] So it's, it's both. I-I- the power, the power shifts upon implementation of Slack if that's what leadership, uh, i- whether if there's a groundswell f- pushing for that or if that's what leadership wants. Uh, it, it does not, however, inherently shift power if, if that's not something that the, the users are seeking after.

[Maria Göthe] I'm, I'm a little bit curious about, uh, do you only work remote or, uh, what is your policy around that?

[Elle Miller] Slack is, uh, well, Slack and Salesforce are, are defining their policies around w- remote work for, for employees, like, like most companies are right now. It's-- we're, we're in the middle of a, a tr- a global transition in, in how work i- is done and what the expectations are. I, I myself f- am fully remote right now. Uh, I, I expect to be, uh, I expect to have the opportunity to be back in the office with my coworkers, um, at least a few times a month in, in the years to come. Um, but right now we're still, uh, especially in, in the US, we are still experiencing the ebb and flow of, of pandemic concerns, and so I am fully remote.

[Maria Göthe] Okay. So how, uh, do you consciously build, uh, your culture through Slack, and what are the key practices? For those who are not fully into Slack, could you explain what are the, you know-

[Gustaf Tadaa] How do you do it?

[Maria Göthe] Yeah, how do you do it?

[Gustaf Tadaa] Build c- the, the culture, the team feeling, the-

[Maria Göthe] Yeah, that everyone wants

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... being there together when we're all remote and you're even onboarding, you haven't met your colleagues a- in real life, right? How-

[Elle Miller] Yeah

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... how-- What are the key practices?

[Elle Miller] One of the things that I have found is i- responsiveness is, is number one. I, I, I find that when I am-- We, we talk about it-- We, we talk about responsiveness colloquially as Slack speed. When I'm, when I'm expressing a need or a, or a problem in one of the channels, I feel most connected to my coworkers when, when I receive one of a, a series of near immediate responses because Slack, Slack makes it easy to respond. It's, it's the-- fully mobile enabled, um, and whether it's a reactgy or an emoji and, and every company can customize their, their culture around those emojis, those become really important because then I can get-- It, it's almost as if I can poll the audience quickly on, on my post. I, I ultimately need an answer to my question, but I can get the emoji eyes on it or, uh, some sort of reaction where people are letting me know, "I care about you. Your problem is important to me, and I'm gonna, and I'm gonna prioritize your needs." And I think it-- whether it's a remote context or, or a, a, an in-person context, as humans, we, we have a desire for a sense of belonging. "Do I matter here?" is a question that we ask a lot. And so the emojis and reactgys and the at mentions and the opportunity to build momentum on, on a question is, I think, nurturing that, the answer to that fundamental question of, "Do I matter?" When you've got eyes on, on your post and when people are re- are responding, it feels like the answer is yes.

[Maria Göthe] Mm-hmm. So, uh, if you, uh, we talked a little bit earlier about organizations where, uh, Slack is really functioning well and where you can have a harder time, uh, implementing Slack. So how do you get an organization who's not maybe, uh, used to, uh, being as transparent and, um, sharing and asking for help, for instance? Uh, that could be really tricky-

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm

[Maria Göthe] ... in some organizations because then you have to reveal that I don't know it all. Because to me, uh, that is kind of the key of getting it going so that you really get responses. Otherwise, well, it's gonna be an answer and people are going to not, uh, post all these, uh, questions.

[Elle Miller] It's a great question and, and a great point. When, when an organization has, uh, a culture of, of shame or of a, a blame-shame culture where we, we don't ask questions here, that's, that's not well-tuned for, for a platform like Slack because in order, i-i-in order to get work done, we, we need to be able to ask questions. But that's also not well-tuned. The, the shame-blame culture is not well-tuned for 2021 in, in the most effective-- We know that the most effective way to get work done is to-- i-is a, a transparent culture where vulnerability is prized and, and diversity and inclusion are, are found in, in spades. We, we know that from, from the data. I think Slack a-allowsThe work-- Slack allows work to get done faster because it, it, because of the medium. Uh, it, it also... I think one of the greatest gifts of implementing Slack is that it allows us to focus on the highest priority work. So it, it, it's much more as if we're all sitting in an open floor plan together. It's that dream of, uh, uh, it mimics that dream of the open floor plan office where we're all just swiveling in our chair, uh, whether it's to, uh, a, a colleague, uh, a direct colleague or someone who's, uh, at a, at a higher level than us in the organization. The swivel chair effect happens in channel because everybody has access and everybody can, can comment. So a healthy-- in a healthy culture, um, no matter what the rank, a, a person can s- can send, you know, updated information or a correction to, you know, to, to the point that somebody else made. It, it requires, again, like, like in the, the default world, it requires the respect and civility of, of, uh, communication that has, uh, discretion at the right times. Um, but I think it, it allows us to focus not on getting more done, but on getting the right things done, and so we can prioritize that more effectively. Um, to, to your point about organizations that are, are maybe overly rigid, um, security is something that Slack does really, really well in around, uh, the security of Slack Connect. The technical architecture that enables security on the platform is, is robust. Once you are in the ecosystem, once you're on the Slack platform, um, it's also-- it's, it's possible to, to enable certain features that allow for, uh, security of... Like I said, you can, you can decide who can post in a certain channel. But we, we provide... The, the, the consulting services that my team provides, um, are around grid design, channel strategy. Uh, we, we ha- we provide advisory around the channel naming conventions and, um, based on the, the discovery phase where we map the existing organization, um, what, what channel naming convention would be best for you? Uh, what ratio of public to private channels do you need to, to target for your organization? Um, how can the policies and settings that we implement, uh, both mirror your organization or if, if you're ready for, for o- if you have openness to it, how can they provide some greater transparency and, and search ultimately searchability?

[Gustaf Tadaa] You, you've-

[Elle Miller] Yeah

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... a, a couple of time mentioned, well, it goes faster and you, you mentioned Slack speed and it's on mobile and it's there all the time. Uh, and I think the, the, the primary criticism that I've heard, uh, when working with Slack, when trying to onboard people who are not used to Slack is that it's really, really stressful. It's all the time-

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... and it's all over the place and I feel like I have to read everything in every channel. Like I'm always missing out. There is a like internal communications FOMO, a fear of missing out on the important conversation that is going on over in that channel there and suddenly you have Slack consuming your entire workday, both by being pinged and ponged in your pocket all the time, but also the feeling of always missing something and that-

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm

[Gustaf Tadaa] ... causes a lot of stress. Uh, so, uh, how is-- When does Slack actually contribute to stress? In what settings will Slack contribute to stress and how can you do to mitigate that?

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm. I had-- I, I have experienced this Slack FOMO myself, especially a-as I was, as I was onboarding but, but then six months into, into my role at Slack. I, I wanted to... I, I'm a zero inbox person or at least that's my, that's my nirvana. Um- It, it almost never happens though and and, and as it is on, on the Slack platform, I usually-- I, I found myself, uh... I was able to very effectively get my work done but my, my week ended with plenty of, of channels with, with a, a notification dot there. Um, because sometimes, not sometimes, o-often we're part of channels for a particular purpose but we don't need to be there for everything and, and that mirrors the way that we work in the real world. In a teaming environment, we're invited to numerous meetings where we are part of the informed set but the, uh, decide, um, or, or the, the decision process maybe isn't something that we're part of at that moment. It's, it's delegated to another team. It's more appropriate for another team. So I, I had a, a-- I had a moment of learning and realization when I was told that in Slack, uh, there, there are-- there's a certain executive at Slack tru- who, who was attempting to model the behavior of trust in their team and on, on Friday afternoon-- Friday at five o'clock, this person simply marks as read, uh, essentially the channels that they haven't gotten to that week and the infor- the information in those channels that have- hasn't been read because point one, it's, it's searchable and you can always come back to it and point two is that that executive trusts that they haveThreaded and @mentioned, uh, and, and Ben threaded and @mentioned appropriately in the week, and they trust their team's work enough that they don't need to see and consume every bit of information. And so I, I decided to follow that model myself. I don't read every message that's in every channel on my Slack. It, it, it would consume all of my time and, and that would not be an appropriate use of my time or an effective use of my time. And I, I think s- I'll, I'll go on f- with, with two more points, one about synchronous swarming, um, and the other about the stress of the, of the ping. When, when Salesforce acquired Slack, uh, the Salesforce leader, Marc Benioff, was highlighting and, and has continued to highlight the value of synchronous swarming, where, uh, in, in a channel we can have a, a swarming effect of, of productivity where the, the team members from... The, the, the needed team members are all in the channel together providing, uh, what they need to, to move faster and, and one of the key examples has, that's been used is, is the brokerage, um, where a mortgage is getting approved at lightning speed because everyone's in the channel and, and finally not waiting on email or waiting on a phone call. There's, there's incredible value there. Um, and I am, I'm a strong advocate for the asynchronous power of Slack. Synchronous swarming is... It has its place, but that's not the, that's not maybe the highest use of Slack or, or maybe the intended use in, in all cases. Asynchronous work in Slack means that we can reduce our stress and we can reduce that a- adrenaline and cortisol response in our bodies where, uh, "Oh my gosh, I'm, I'm late. They're, they're waiting for me. I need to respond right away." I, I need to respond, and being in channel and having, uh, the, the power for @mentions means that I can respond quickly, but there can be a reduce, a re- a reduction in stress because also my colleague can respond quickly. And so there have, there have been times where I'm, uh, you know, it's, it, it's 2021, and we all have a, a more permeable boundary between work and life. So if I'm dropping my daughter off at school, or if I'm attending to a need that's a, a non-professional need in my life, many times, because I've had something posted in a public channel, my colleague has been able to jump in on a, a customer request and continue moving that forward, and then, and then I can jump back in and both feel supported and productive as a team. The pings and the, the always on, um, I, I think some of that, that kind of ties back to our discussion earlier around are we d- are humans creating technology to serve us, or are we serving, behaviorally serving the technology? I- is it influencing the way we behave? We, uh... Our, our, our specialists, when we implement Slack or, or provide maturity services to customers, uh, we spend quite a bit of advisory time around, a- around the ideas of how, how do we use Slack to our advantage and, and m- rather than s- we don't serve Slack. Slack serves us as users. So figuring out the right balance of notifications, channel membership. Um, there's a culture at, at Slack w- when, when Slack is using Slack, there's, there's a very supportive culture around leaving channels. I leave channels all the time, or I mute channels when I, when I don't need notifications, but I wanna still have a- have the access. Um, leaving a channel simply it, it, it is celebrated, and it means nothing. It, it, it means that you're taking care of yourself and making sure that your sidebar can be navigable.

[Gustaf Tadaa] It also means you trust who's ever in the channel to do whatever needs to be done on that topic, right? It's, uh, it's a sign of trusting the group that when you leave the channel.

[Maria Göthe] And also-

[Elle Miller] Absolutely

[Maria Göthe] ... it's, it's a sign of, um, you being, uh, self-leading and being able to take responsibility for your own, you know, your communication and your, uh, what you need to know and, and your information. And, and that is also something when I listen to you now, uh, it requires quite a l- big portion of-

[Gustaf Tadaa] Mm-hmm

[Maria Göthe] ... being self, being able to self-manage on a quite-

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm

[Maria Göthe] ... deep level, uh, taking a lot of decisions, and of course, that it is what it means being born today and being in 2021.

[Elle Miller] It's true.

[Maria Göthe] Absolutely. But I'm a bit curious about h- can Slack be misused? Because how do we, how do we make sure that this is a channel, and we decide what's in it? So how can, how can... If Slack is going to support us in not, you know, being misused in a way that is not inclusive and, um-

[Gustaf Tadaa] Or control us.

[Maria Göthe] Yeah, or control-

[Gustaf Tadaa] Yeah

[Maria Göthe] ... us and so forth.

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm.

[Maria Göthe] Uh, it's kind of a big question, but I'm curious about your thoughts about that.

[Elle Miller] I, I think that's, I think that's the right question to be asking of, of any platform, especially, especially today as we're thinking about how, how digital platformsCan highlight the best of humanity or enable the worst. Yeah. On, on Slack, uh, one, one answer to that, and I think there are, there are many wise answers. One answer to that is, is the way that we, uh, empower the admin and train the ad- the Slack admin or admins plural to make sure that they are, uh, aware of the tools and capabilities at, at their discretion, um, to, to, to moderate channels and, and to make sure that Slack is in any corporate environment, that Slack is being used the way it is intended and that it's being used, um, in a way that highlights or, or, or that, that supports diversity and inclusion and transparency. And to your point that you made as well, I find it, it's, it's absolutely true that Slack requires... and, and working in the business world today requires that we lean into our, our personal agency. I, I feel like y- when I use Slack, I am focusing on and pursuing my priorities and my, my goals rather than in the email context, I open my inbox and suddenly I am serving as I scroll and, and mark as read. Uh, I'm, I'm serving the priorities of other people who have reached out to me rather than, uh, being able to, to get my most important things done in a day. There's a balance to that in order to be a good, a good teammate. Sometimes I serve and sometimes I lead in, in my priorities. It's my opinion that Slack enables a, a more healthy balance to that. Mm-hmm. So I, uh, you, you mentioned diversity and inclusion there again, and, uh, we've talked about the power dynamics. So what kind of people actually just gets more in- included and steps more into power, uh, on Slack, and what types of people tend to kind of lag behind? Like what, what people-- who, who that, that might have had more power before and been a natural team member before, uh, will tend to, to drop out and, and who... H- how do we find those people who, uh, who, who this, who this is not conducive to? Like how, how do we spot that? Mm-hmm. The-- To me, the greater, the greater publicity of content on Slack means that more content is consumed. And so there's a pull to, to generate that content. It, it can be something of a news feed. And, and th- this-- we, we see this in all kinds of different platforms. So those who are more prone to generate content, uh, are then surfaced-- are, are then just m- more present in, in all of the channels where they are producing this content. And they also-- their name is more, uh, frequently present in searched terms, um, and in, in all of the, in all the ways that, that Slack, that Slack works. So generating content is a way to gain power in Slack. That's, that's one point. Uh, I have found as well that answering questions, being responsive, um, threading, b- being part of the threaded communications is also a way to gain notoriety in, in Slack. And I'm, I'm m- mapping, um, power to, to publicity here in, in Slack because the-- in, in this context, the more often our name pops up, the more popular we seem perhaps. There's, there's obvious limits to this, and there's, there's Slack etiquette, uh, which is something that we, we teach when we implement Slack at a, at an enterprise level. Uh, Slackiquette is a word that we use internally. But it's-- I think if, if a person would like to gain power on the platform, producing content is a way to do that. Responding to content is also a way to do that. That's true in, in the default world as well. You have, um, in, in any company, subject matter experts and, uh, i- in the in-person office, you have th- that person that you go to because you know that they will have the answer, or that they will be that node to connect you with the answer. But, but are they the same people- That's true on Slack too ... are they the same people when they step on Slack or are... Right? D- does that-- 'cause it's a, it's a different way of dev- de- of delivering your expertise, of being present, of generating content. I mean, to me it's v- I, I'm, I'm loud. I generate content by being loud. And it's-- that's very different from writing up a lot of intelligent answers or crafting posts, right? It's two very different skill sets. It's true. It's something that I have i- in, in my own professional journey I have had to learn and adjust to because I am, I, I am a, um, team-- I, I join a team as a supporter. I'm a often kind of mentor coach personality, and I, I therefore value the, um, in-person one-on-one, uh, he- helper, helper role. So I, I've actually-- I've received coaching that as I'm looking at my professional path, it's important that I, I generate content that is searchable.It's important that I am seen on the platform as generative and responsive. And so much yes to your point, that's something that I've had to navigate. And it is possible that the people who are generating posts in Slack and who are seen as the subject matter expert or the go-to person on the platform could be a different person than is seen that way in the default world.

[Maria Göthe] Mm-hmm. I think it's very interesting that you say that the ones who is generating content gets more power. So for me, that sounds like if you give away your expertise, then you get power.

[Elle Miller] Mm-hmm.

[Maria Göthe] And that sounds great to me. I mean, the more you give from your knowledge and your experience, because if you look way back, when I started working in the 80s, when I came out from school, the one who had the most knowledge that they didn't share had the power. So what you're talking about here is really a platform that allows really the power to be among the ones who choose to actually give their time, energy, and spread their knowledge. I think it's-

[Elle Miller] That's a great point.

[Maria Göthe] Yeah, I think that's very fantastic.

[Elle Miller] Is power found-- A power broker is someone who has information and is choosing not to share it or is deciding when to share it. And I think we've highlighted that there is power found in expertise in someone who is choosing to demonstrate their knowledge by sharing that information.

[Maria Göthe] Som vi precis har hört så påverkar ju våra digitala verktyg vår organisationskultur. Men hur kan ett verktyg påverka en hel arbetsmarknad? Det kommer vi att utforska mer i nästa veckas podd då vi träffar Sean Hedayat från LinkedIn som är Sverigechef där. Vi som står bakom den här podden är Wise Consulting, Talos Media producerar, jag heter Maria Göthe och min kollega Gustaf Josefsson Tadaa!
