---
title: "http://www.cracked.com/personal-experiences-2388-i-frustrate-people-living-escape-room-business.html"
kind: article
party: third
source: pocket
source_id: "pocket:0109"
provenance: extracted
url: "http://www.cracked.com/personal-experiences-2388-i-frustrate-people-living-escape-room-business.html"
ingested: 2026-05-13
created: 2016-10-22
tags: []
status: reference
pocket_status: unread
enrichment: original
---

Escape rooms are all the rage these days. It's like living out a Saw movie, only you don't have to mutilate yourself (probably).
Escape rooms are all the rage these days. They are live-action games in which you're locked in a room and have to find your way out by either solving a series of elaborate puzzles or getting into shouting matches with your friends until you run out of time, depending on how good you all are at cooperating. It's like living out a Saw movie, only you don't have to mutilate yourself (probably).
We talked to Nate Martin, the co-founder of Puzzle Break, and Cody Civiero, Operations Manager for SmartyPantz, to learn about what it's like to trap people for fun.
4 You Have To Design Clever Puzzles (Which Frustrated Customers Will Smash To Pieces) Puzzle Break Escape room puzzles tend to employ the same logic as old video games -- that is, you need to have the exact same mental illness as the developer to fully understand their reasoning. "In Morning Never Comes," Cody said, "the players are trying to solve the mystery of Vivian Blackwood, a librarian rumored to have been murdered by her husband." SmartyPantz
Possibly due to her horrible taste in interior design. "Players have to pay special attention to the books, newspaper articles, photos, and paintings in the room. Maybe one article clipping will point them to a particular book on the shelf, or maybe the first letters of the titles on one shelf will spell out the location of the next clue. Perhaps the person in the painting over the mantle is holding something you've seen in the room? You never know. Eventually, the players will find a decorative box with some ashes, a dog's collar, and another key. What do they do with those? You have to come visit us to find out!" Advertisement The puzzles are about as straightforward as a wad of knotted Christmas lights, and while some people find it fun and rewarding to untangle the reasoning, other people get frustrated. And when humans get frustrated, they revert to a much simpler, Hulkier approach to problem solving. SmartyPantz
Mark Ruffalo is preemptively banned, to be safe. "Doors that are obviously locked are assaulted with all their might," Nate said. "Fragile pieces are regularly dropped, crushed, or worse. Electronic components are ripped from their housings. One player spent the entire hour trying to surreptitiously disassemble and demolish all the furniture in the room in hopes of finding clues. A huge part of the job is quickly and efficiently replacing lost/damaged items between games." Advertisement Cody saw the same phenomenon. "One time, a petite, 90-pound girl was somehow able to physically rip apart a locked briefcase. We attempted to replicate this so we could prevent it from happening again, but big burly guys were unable to do so. We still have no idea how she did it." Advertisement It's rarely malicious -- people simply get too caught up in trying to find the next clue. But as with any industry, you also attract a minority of gaping assholes. Puzzle Break
"Okay, I've assigned 'smash quadrants' so we can demolish the room with maximum efficiency." " once had a testosterone-fueled group of frat boys try to use force to break open an obviously locked door instead of solving the room correctly or even asking for a hint," Cody said. "We also had one puzzle involving a remote control car in a maze with Plexiglas over it. Some drunks just straight-up smashed the Plexiglas to circumvent having to run the car through the maze." Advertisement Why don't escape rooms construct everything out of tougher material, you ask? Because people would still try to smash things apart, and hurt themselves in the process. And on that note ...
3 Customers Need To Be Protected From Themselves SmartyPantz Both Nate and Cody emphasized that their tenures have been injury-free and that their rooms are safe, but both also admitted that this is sometimes only thanks to the fact they treat their guests like suicidal toddlers. "One of our rooms is set in a serial killer's basement," Cody said, "and there are jars with severed feet in rusty water that look like formaldehyde. Even though we tell people that anything glued or screwed down doesn't need to be moved, one group pulled all the jars off the shelf (which they were glued to), pulled off the lids (which were glued shut), reached into the gross water, took the feet out, and spread them in a row on the ground." Advertisement Advertisement SmartyPantz
On the upside, the local foot fetish Craigslist group has some amazing team skills now. The group was huddled together so closely that the monitoring staff couldn't see that they were throwing a necrophilia-themed pedicure party. "The host finally overheard one of the customers say, 'Maybe we're supposed to drink the water' in a completely serious tone." And suddenly, the behavior of every horror movie victim makes sense. Advertisement SmartyPantz
Thankfully, there weren't any straws in the room, or they may have taken it as a sign. That wasn't the only time staff had to burst into the room and talk sense into everyone. "A group of friends goaded their buddy into crawling into the serial killer's incinerator after they turned it off, then they managed to lock him in with the electromagnetic lock. It doesn't actually generate heat, but he was trapped in a confined space, and our staff needed to intervene and let him out." Yeah, it turns out that escape rooms are a test of intelligence in more ways than one, which is why constantly monitoring guests is crucial. And also because ... Advertisement Advertisement
2 People Will Have Sex In The Rooms SmartyPantz Escape rooms are essentially intelligence tests crossbred with haunted houses, and intelligence and fear are two of the top three aphrodisiacs known to man (the third is porn). And that's why, according to Cody, "One gentleman once showed up at the site, asked to take a look at the rooms, and then inquired if he was allowed to rent them by the hour to have sex in them." SmartyPantz
Hey, who knows what position the owner of that spooky hand is in? "Another gentleman has come in repeatedly on dates. He always plays the same room and brings a different woman with him, and likes to make himself look smart by pretending he hasn't attempted the room before. My colleagues in Vancouver let me know that there had been two men and one women who pulled the same trick multiple times on their dates." Advertisement Advertisement We'll never know if those dates were sufficiently impressed by the mock shows of intelligence, but other guests don't have the patience to get through an entire hour of puzzle solving and the time it takes to go all the way back to their homes, a hotel room, or even, like, a broom closet. SmartyPantz
Maybe the character names aren't helping. Just sayin'. "One time, a pair of guests had gone out of camera range, and our host figured they were in the one place that had puzzle material and wasn't covered by the cameras. They failed the room, and the host went to conclude it after they ran out of time. He found them against each other in a blind spot, and they frantically adjusted their clothing after having had a quickie. We made sure to clean that room extra thoroughly that night." Advertisement And so, if escape room porn doesn't already exist, it's no doubt being made right now.
