---
title: "LDP applications - Google Kalkylark"
kind: article
party: third
source: pocket
source_id: "pocket:0227"
provenance: extracted
url: "https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1cxg0lis00kf-YQ90tfd3dTv9x_fF3LhGIY2wyJB0DHA/edit#gid=958782843"
ingested: 2026-05-13
created: 2019-03-20
tags: []
status: reference
pocket_status: unread
enrichment: original
---

1 Accepted 33
2 Men 17 42
3 Women 16 29
4 ID Gender Full Name Email Belonging Status What are your experiences of co-creative communities and events? Describe your leadership experience. What do you consider to be your personal strengths? Why would you like to be a part of this program?What do you hope to learn and where do you hope to apply it?
5 53 F Alina Hedenström alina.hedenstrom@hyperisland.se Other Accepted I'm currently studying my last year of DMC at Hyper Island, which in my experience really foster community and team work. A part which I've really taken to heart as I believe we're stronger together. I've been part of the Daybreaker events in Sthlm, and I hope to be a bigger part of that in the future. I literally just attended the first meet up of a sustainable/vegan community/network. Tbh I keep nudging into communities and I have experience in attending lots of events - but I don't really know how to take it from there. I keep getting feedback that me together with another classmate are the ones that keep our class together, that we're such a big part in taking care of that community. Right now I'm doing my internship with Bruce.app until September, which hopefully will include arranging events and get more experience with that. I went to my first Borderland last year, and absolutely loved it and the feeling of community and care that goes into that. (My internship is the reason I've ticked "other" as for communities - I'm not sure how much time I will have to spare in helping out with Borderland this year.) My view of leadership is currently on a journey where the definition of leadership is changing. Previously I would describe myself as a person who likes to take the lead, but not having to do so - and if no one else steps up when needed, I will. I'm still that person. However, I've started to realise that leadership is so much more. I keep hearing I bring my class together, and that's one kind of leadership. I want to take care of people around me, in a way where I can be a part of creating the possibility for people to take care of themselves (so facilitation if you'd like), and that's another kind of leadership. Then there's self leadership, which is something I continuously want and need to work with to meet my own needs and wants. In September last year my class was supposed to have a workshop I really wanted to go through. It was a workshop about leadership with Ben Ward. It got cancelled, and since I wanted this for both myself and the people around me I contacted Ben directly and solved it so we got to have this workshop anyway. Ben later told me that he saw such a strong leader in me, which inspired me to continue and I’m currently reading the book Co-Active Leadership (which is one reason my definition of leadership is changing). Leadership is something I’m curious about and really want to develop further (but I’m not really sure how to) and I want to explore the potential of the leader within me (but I don’t really know what to do with it). I am generally optimistic. I’m a problem solver: every problem is a challenge, something to be solved, and there’s always a way to do so and I try to see things from the bright side. I’m openminded and I keep hearing I’m all but judgemental. I’m naive in the way so I try to see the best in things/people. All of this at the same time as I’m sceptic and question things. I’m very adaptable. I’m caring and loyal which makes people trust me. I strive to see situations from several perspectives to understand people around me and their actions. I love to inspire and motivate others - I find helping to create a positive change very rewarding. I care for health with both myself and others (physical and psychological). My “just do it” attitude - I jump on challenges and I consciously step out of my comfort zone. I’m stubborn. I’m curious, I want to do and know a lot about things, I believe there’s a learning in the tough things, and I want to keep develop personally. I saw the post about this program and got excited and energetic by the thought of it. To me that says a lot (especially since I was irritated and tired before). It sounds challenging and a little bit scary in the good developing way. One of my learning goals right now is in relation to leadership: I want to learn more and become more mindful of different kinds of leadership. I want to learn more about leadership and how to apply it practically. I want develop my leadership skills, and I want to be a good leader for both myself and others. I want to practise and become better with facilitating others in ways where I don’t give answers, but help people find the answers themselves. I hope to learn and practise skills, to consciously bring out the leader in me, and challenge myself to personal development - at the same time as I’m openminded and want to soak in everything I might not yet know there is to learn in this area. And then I want to apply it In everyday life, wherever I end up. If that’s events within communities already described as co-creative, within organisations in need of change or somewhere else matters less. Because I believe this is needed everywhere, I think everyone can be a leader in different ways, and I think it has to start from within and spread from there: I want to take part in this program for my own personal growth, to develop my own knowledge and experience so that I can be a good leader for myself and others, and in that way help and inspire others to be good leaders.
6 69 F Anjali Menon id.anjali.m@gmail.com BL Accepted I have attended regional burns in Spain, Denmark and Sweden, including BL. I am also part of Studio Tau at Blivande, which is a co-creative art studio bringing different artistic pathways together. I proposed and initiated a themed cabin project at Afterglow (a burn in Sweden), taking lead on the organisational elements as well as ensuring everyone's contributions had space to breathe/exist within that concept in the most optimal way- (sometimes it is a clear yes, or a compromise, or a no, this is not exactly possible but what about this alternative?). At work, I have taken lead on mentoring interns, some of whom have now progressed to full-time positions at my workplace. I definitely have the curiousity and drive to develop more as a leader. I'm still a baby in this field, I feel. There is much I want to learn and try. I am very organised and dependable. I am good at linking things together and making sense of a cobweb of plans and ideas, so that there is always a clear overview of infrastructure and planning. I would say I am good at breaking down complex situations and bringing clarity. I am not afraid of making decisions - and these are not necessarily my own preference or choice, but sometimes a decision has to be made within a group and I can bring confidence and stability to the choices being made and why those decisions were made. I want to learn alongside and together with a bunch of interesting and engaged people. I am interested to hear about methods, ideas and experiences. I want to apply these experiences and learnings to the burn community, the art community and my everyday life. I want to learn in areas where I am lacking, to shed light on the blindspots of what I imagine leadership to be. I would like to learn how to bring the best out of participants and their strengths, engage and uplift different members and areas of a team, and to inspire. Leadership to me is knowing how best to utilise and develop the collective skills and intelligence of a group, and to make the individuals feel empowered to take action. I want to know more!
7 2 F Britta Kronacher britta.kronacher@gmx.de Other Accepted In 2013 I joined the Burning Man community and started organizing burning pubs with another burner in Hamburg, Germany.
In the first years I just went to the pubs and to Burning Man. As member of the camp ATTOL I was able to learn camp structures, how create something bigger for the community, consent in all forms and what the Regional Nevada event is about. The camp is organized top-down. The co-creative part starts on Playa (build, greeting, dome maintenance, tear-down).
My first real co-created event I experienced was Spark in the Dark. I fell in love with the "nordic" way of organizing events and got inspired to dream big.
With our art collective "my Dick" we attended BL in 2017 and 2018 and are planning to come back this year too.
Today, we have a burn in Hamburg (called Hamburn, took place twice already), which I initiated, that got taken over by more community members last year. We are not there yet when it comes to co-creation and I'm looking forward to learn more, especially how to get the people moving. In the Burn world I'm the one who signs contracts for Hamburn and am still initiating meetings and leading them. We have co-leads for all different tasks.
I'm also co-leading My Dick.
At my default work space, I used to lead teams in different sizes.
Actually, I prefer co-creating way more than leadership. I'm charismatic and a good motivator. My high empathy and sense of justice make me a loving and caring person. Many people say that my energy is extremly positive and pleasing.
I'm creative, outcome oriented and have the mental capacity to implement even complex projects. I hope to become a better non-leader or co-leader ;-) Someone who motivates to or initiates or enables co-creation. In our Hamburg community, there a few hard working heros and many, who will help of course, when you ask them. How do we get them more involved...
As our dickhead will skip Borderland, it will be me initiating the My Dick camp this year. Would love to do it the co-creative way.
8 36 F Clara Lindberg claraelsalindberg@gmail.com Other Accepted I have co-arranged about three small (>50 participants) larps, and helped with practical things on several other larps. I've also helped some small larps with budget and logistics. I'm chairman of an organization that helps others to create larps and other culture events, where I organize meetings and the outline of our work. I've also been the main organizer of several small larps and events. I'm highly organized, enthusiastic and driven, quick to learn and wants to learn! I'm a good listener and used to viewing things from different perspectives. Problems are made to solve, and I love to analyze and figure out how to face a challenge - especially in a team! Also, some people say that I'm funny sometimes. I want to develop my ability to co-operate efficiently with others, become a better leader when organizing events and help others structure their events. Leadership and event planning is based om good communication and planning, and that is what I want to become better at, because I love to create events and want to become better at it. The very best things are built together with others!
9 60 F Emma Gerdien egerdien@gmail.com Other Accepted I have quite a lot of experience from co-creative events and communities (The Node, BL, Urban Burn, Burning Man and other happenings), but more rarely in a leading position. I always enjoy the process - the struggles, the joy and the feeling of connection (and occasional disconnection) it brings. My leading experience is mostly from my work as an organizer of public cultural events. I create and plan events and projects in collaboration with organisations, venues and youths.
My experience of it is that I wasn't born with the skills, but I'm learning step by step. My strengths are my ability to listen and to foresee what is about to happen/could potentially take an unexpected turn.
Not that I'm psychic, it's just conclusion made out of listening to different stakeholders and analysing their behaviours I guess.
That, and that I'm not afraid of much these days! I'm interested in the healing and transforming aspects of co-creative communities and events. I would like to be better at introducing these forms of co-creating in my everyday work/life, in order to share this practice with people I meet (in my work and elsewhere -
especially youths).
When introducing more meaning and connection to projects, I believe we can inspire others to try to do the same.
Since I've experienced a lot of you organizers leadership, I know there is a lot off goodness in here for me to learn from! :)
10 5 F Essi Helena Laurila essihelena@gmail.com Other Accepted I have taken part to the Burning man festival (Aalto on Fire & Space on Fire projects), to Borderland, to Helsinki Decompression (local Burn in Finland) and a local festival in Finland called Aktiivimalli. I was also managing a community space called Otaniemi Free Space.
In some cases I have one of the main producers and in some cases more as a helping hand for example in building up and taking down.
Otaniemi Free Space
The main coordinator of Otaniemi Free Space –project.
Otaniemi Free Space was a student/voluntary run space for the local communities at Aalto University campus (during three months in spring 2017), where different students, student organizations, groups and individuals could meet each other, experiment ideas and projects, self-organize events and cultural activities, workshops and exhibit and perform art. The only prerequisites to make things happen were self-iniatitivity and respect for the commonly agreed rules and the spirit of the space. All the activities were open for everyone and most of them were free of charge.
The concept for the project is based on the Free Space movement from San Francisco, whose idea is to use temporarily empty spaces to bring together local groups that are at the area - such as local technology communities that organize coding courses for homeless people. As a backdrop to all this, there is a livelihood of the "Commons" thinking of the past years, where the markets and other public spaces serve as a forum for free social influence and exchange of ideas.
The project was a passion and a full time-job for me. It consisted of variety of aspects: Negotiating the property for the project, grants, organised weekly meetings, marketing, setting up the space, running the space, event producer etc.
http://ofree.space/ofs2017/
Chairperson of Entropy,
Chairperson Electronic music culture association Entropy , which is a non-for-profit an fully voluntary-based association whose purpose is to promote electronic music culture in the capital area of Helsinki.
Last year Entropy had its 25th anniversary and we organised a magnificient music event at Circo, hosting over 20 music artists and 600 paying guests. We also built the venue fully ourselves from the technical setup to the artistic installations. My role in the event organisation was the member of the coordinating team and the art director. I was particularly keen on involving the volunteers and enabling them to realize their artistic plans.
Aktiivimalli
Aktiivimalli, organised in the summer 2018, was a continuation to Entropy's tradition of organising music and art camps in the countryside or in a middle of a Finnish forest. That year I was Entropy's chairperson so my role in the event was also a member of the coordinating team, taking large responsibility roles Aktiivimalli ("Activity model") was a special event particularly as the organisation's philosophy based on do-ocracy and participatory culture, which means that each event participant should participate also to the event organisation at the same time , at least contributing a couple of hours with shorter-term tasks such as security, cleaning or food preparation for the staff. My tasks included (among others) planning of tasks, and dividing them equally with the participants, however, also basing on their personal preferences. The event was a success, including the participatory organisation method/do-ocracy which showcased working fine despite some temporarily chaotic coordination and communication. This summer we will organise the Aktiivimalli event again and want to develop ideas for better co-creation and participation even further.
I am hard working once I have committed myself in a project. I get well along with all kind of people and have no problems of working with most people. I am a good listener and I want to understand what are peoples desires in a project.
I want to apply the experience learned from the Co-Creative Leadership Development Program to Aktiivimalli 2, which will be held in Finland in August 2019. This year I am a key coordination team member in Aktiivimalli 2.
I have versatile experience in organising participatory events and learned a lot by doing. But there is still so much to learn.
For example Otaniemi Free space project was meant to be co-created with different teams, but the main organising team ended up being just 2 people, however, the series of events attracted tens of active people. I would like to learn how these kind of people could be better involved to contibute and participate to future projects (like Aktiivimalli 2) and how to keep them committed. So, all kind of new ideas and concrete methods will be very helpfull.
I am also very much looking for usefull insights on leadership theory, which could help me to put things a have done into context. I have never taken any courses on leardership, just learned by doing, so it would be a time to do and develop that site of me further.
It would be very resfreshing on having support and sharing thoughts with like-minded people. Leadership can be very lonely at at times. For ex paradoxically I was writing my thesis about Otaniemi Free Space project and co-creation, without not much support or sharing with others.
Analysing myself through the personal development excercises will be surely usefull for myself.
I am a 100% team worker in good and in bad. I have understood the value of team working, becaude things get so much better done when there are several people ideating. I find my strengt with people.
On top of this years Aktiivimalli-festival, my dream is to have a permanent co-creation hub in Helsinki. Otaniemi Free Space was a great start, but it just started to flourish when it already finished. So this training would also benefit this long term dream!
11 15 F Gerrie Holloway gerriemb@me.com BL Accepted I have considerable experience in co-creating a specialist service for female offenders, using a positive psychology approach which used empowerment, radical acceptance and an awareness of the unconscious as a valuable resource for both staff and users of the service. The service won national awards, but key for me was the role of service users in the co-creation of the service.
I have also co-created a massage camp in the Nowhere festival, and the Juice Bar/Edge camp at Borderlands. The co-creation has been on many levels; practical, emotional, psychological and relational, and included the co-creation of a community. I have aimed to use my experience as a psychologist to contribute to the co-creation of sexual space. I have also contributed to providing positive experiences for those within the camp by utilising knowledge of psychological theory in group dynamics.
I am also a co-creator of an international women's Skype group, that meets on a monthly basis.
I have co-created workshops that focus on sexual practices for women.
I am currently living in a conscious tantric community and believe that we are co-creating a way of living together that will provide positive growth experiences for all those living together. As a Consultant Clinical Psychologist I have leadership experience in setting up a service for female offenders with a diagnosis of mental illness. I have also been clinical lead of a treatment programme for service users who have been given a diagnosis of antisocial and/or borderline personality disorder, and have used my leadership position to ensure that a critical stance has been adopted to the whole 'diagnosis' activity. I regularly lead groups that I teach into positive approaches to challenging behaviour, and lead practitioners into working with as much compassion as they can for both themselves and users of their service.
I regularly provide process oriented supervision in which represents a leadership position.
I have leadership experience that seemed to come from how people saw me in the Edge camp last year, rather than any formal leadership role. During the camp I wanted to explore and practice providing leadership and how that could happen without it feeling like 'being led'. The feedback from the Camp members was that I was a 'leader' although from my point of view I was a camp member and saw other camp members leading in many ways. The feedback I get from others is that I am 'trusted' or 'safe', which I think feels like a strength, that when people are in doubt or maybe feeling insecure then I am experienced as calm, kind and supportive. I am told that I am wise, intelligent and sassy. Other people have reflected to me that I always have something positive to say about other people, which I do try to do, to see the positives in others.
I personally think I have a wicked sense of humour, a lot of energy, am kind and love to dance. I think I am well-read and am generous and happy to get my hands dirty. I would like to be part of this program as I am interested in leadership generally but also for radically different styles of leadership than I have experienced in my working life. I would like to be part of the program as I think I would learn a lot from the other attendees, their experiences, thoughts and practices, I think that would be very inspiring to me. I would also like to be part of the program as I notice that leadership generally is often 'avoided' by others (and by myself at times)...as it can feel 'too hard' and I am therefore intrigued and excited to be part of a program that would increase my knowledge, skills and understanding of leadership. I have an impression that the programme will offer a model of leadership that will be an exciting alternative to the models of leadership found in say 'management'. I would hope to learn to be more confident and competent at leadership, but more than that I am hoping that I will learn that I have within myself the qualities to make a contribution to the communities that I am part of.
12 54 F Hannah Wittmeyer hwittmeyer@gmail.com Other Accepted I currently work for the Bohemian Foundation, and we launched a community-driven, community co-created institution called the Music District. Fundamentally the work of both entities is aimed at co-creating a healthier and less predatory contemporary/popular music ecosystem, not just in Colorado but in conjunction with other efforts around the world. This means working closely with city and state political leadership, non-profits, universities, K-12 schools, music businesses, musicians (obviously!), and thought leaders around the world (e.g. Sound Diplomacy) to ensure that creatives (be they recreational or professional) are supported and their contributions valued as a public good. Apologies for that ridiculously long sentence :-) Moreover, a big part of my job is working to ensure that musical expression and live music - specifically the genres/expression of our more diverse but historically underrepresented communities that still receive very little public support or funding- are accessible to all (the incarcerated, the elderly, etc). How this plays out in events I've co-curated: a music hubs/ecosystems hands-on "conference" called Surround Sound Labs and a number of smaller events (grantwriting workshops for creatives & arts nonprofits). Currently, I'm working with my Music District colleagues to flesh out what a "Community Pillar" or "Pillow" as we prefer means -- what kind of programming, events, and offerings meet the goals under that wing of the MD? Prior to my work here, in terms of events, I also helped run an event space in Chicago - a multi-use space serving the yoga, ecstatic dance, massage therapy, partner acrobatics, and music communities.
I began taking up leadership roles throughout college (forming & serving as president of student-run associations ranging from international relations to yoga) and have managed people in a pub/music venue and as a program manager for an urban education non-profit. I currently serve on two boards, one for an org that manages 500+ miles of natural lands and trails and one for an org that connects elderly and socially isolated communities to music and arts events. But while I believe I have a natural affinity for leadership, currently I'm not in a leadership role in my career, though my direct manager would like me to pursue leadership training. I am belligerently optimistic and joyful. My nickname at work is "conduit" because what I am most skilled with and love doing is connecting people, organizations, and assets intentionally within our ecosystem. Where there is clearly a space for collaboration between two entities, I provide the space and time to connect them to each other and then to whatever resources and expertise I can provide from the funder/grantmaking side. Other strengths: empathy, creativity, discipline, adaptability/flexibility. This may be circuitous, but I'll start by writing that I participated in Borderland about 5-6 years ago and it was deeply transformative for me. I was only 22 then. Thereafter, the communities I sought to be part of, including the ones I've woven myself into now, tend to follow many of the organizing principles and values of Borderland. Or at least some of them. It has been inspiring to follow from afar the growth and shifts of BL community, such that when I saw this program, I felt a deep internal sense that I needed to pursue this. I hope to take away more radical, empathetic, and creative approaches to event curation, project management, and leadership to my everyday role. I also plan to share what I learn with the people I work with in our musical ecosystem here, to just shift how we have conversations, who we bring to the table, and how we make decisions - be they funding or programming decisions. I believe our organization could benefit greatly, especially in how we act as a player in our community and how we curate programs and events to properly engage all stakeholders in the entire decision-making and creation process.
13 34 F Jessica Karlén jessicakarlen@gmail.com Other Accepted I recently was a part of the membership team at BL and found it challenging but great. I have been at the Node a couple of times and I really like the form of creating and individual responsibility. I am not experienced with these type of communities and events, I am super curious and willing to learn. from what I have experience, it is a great way for me to learn top rely on my capacity. I also experienced it helps me a lot with my performance anxiety. I have been a leader all of my life, I always take responsibility, growing up as an older sister with six younger brothers and some pretty dysfunctional parents I always knew how to get things done and cope with life. When I was younger I worked in church in different youth groups and I also took a one year course in project management at Stockholm Södra Folkhögskola. At the moment I work as a Project Manager at Södertörn University at the department of PR and Communication, I got this job since i worked with the student ambassadors, coordinating and educating them for a year or so. Life wise, I like starting project, mostly in the creative field with theater and comedy, getting people together and creating shows. I know how to get things done, but I feel I want to be more inclusive, letting go of expectations and become more inviting and flexible with goals and methods. I am honest and I am fun. I deliver and I am clear. I have an ability to see people, and to make them feel welcome and excited. I can be the enthusiasmer a project needs. I am persistent and I have an inner serenity that I can turn to in times of chaos. I can also be humble and admit when I am wrong. I have willingness to grow and learn. I want to learn and see myself, I want to have tools for the things I am doing in my life. I also look forward to meet some other leaders and learn. I hope that I will find a friend and a mentor, if not for life, but for the months that comes ahead. I wish also, that I actually have some knowledge that I can share. I also have a huge interest in co-creation overall. This summer I will be a part of BL and I might be to afraid to start my own art project at the moment. I wish I will learn and gain some more self confidence in my leadership skill and develop as a leader also in the way I am communicating.
14 56 F Maria Balaet emsky.mb25@gmail.com BL Accepted I have participated in some events (dinners, parties) that were meant to be co-creative by design. However, based on these experiences, I find equal co-creation to be more achievable in theory than in practice. With the exception of one occasion, which was sadly a memorial, where spontaneous co-creation was the case, I am yet to witness an instance where co-creation materialised fruitfully. Perhaps this is because an essential aspect to be considered is a shared vision/feeling/goal amongst the co-creators that goes beyond superficial facades, into the core of their being. To round it up, my experiences of co-creative events were informative about the challenges that this project design brings about. I have two examples of situations where my leadership experience showed off. First, while at university where I founded a society for psychedelics research, which I successfully coordinated throughout my final degree year. Despite challenges such as assignments&exams, by making sure I coordinated each other team member involved had a small share of the tasks, we stayed true to our initial strategy. Thus we organised scientific talks (proudest achievement being having Dr Ben Sessa speaking at university, a couple of years ago, when university panels were not yet accustomed to psychedelic science in the mainstream), and monthly events meant to engage&develop a student community around scientific debates.
A second instance where I demonstrated leadership skills was more recent, in 2019, where a collaboration with a big TV channel in the UK I was working with turned into an invitation for my entire lab to participate in a TV production lasting 2 weeks. Since I was the member earliest involved, I naturally took the leadership role and organised&coordinated the activity of the other 20 lab members for the entire duration. This implied communicating with each member on a one-to-one level, as well as with the entire team. Being analytical, able to piece information together in novel ways, resilient, and a good listener. I wish to organise a research camp at Borderland, and I wish this project to go ahead the proper way, despite none of the members of my team (or myself for the matter) involved having previous similar experiences. I hope to learn about ways in which people can triage between ideas to only keep the best ones without making anyone feel upset that it is not their independent visions being kept, about ways of dealing with social dynamics&conflicts within a team, about ways of integrating new people into a community/camp without providing them with information that might prime/bias their first impressions, about making shy people talk, about ways to deal with feeling like people do not understand you, about making the best decisions when opinions about the best way are mixed, and maybe most importantly about how to lead without actually ever having to call yourself a leader.
15 42 F Molly Sjöberg misscirkus@gmail.com BL Accepted I work as an artist exploring participatory art where co-creation with both audience/participants and other artists is the working method.
I have been a part of the Node-community in Stockholm since 2015 where I have partaken in the creation of the Node, held workshops and have had key roles in the organization of the Urban Burn festival 2018.
I have attended the co-creative festivals Nowhere in Spain three times and BL once.
I’m currently working as one of the artistic directors of a project called Orgyrobot. Orgyrobot is a participatory show, installation and imaginative world where we invite artists to work with us and audience to take the role as participants and co-creators.
I have also held classes in figure drawing where the class members are asked to be the models for each other and are asked to take initiatives in the teaching, including course of action and knowledge.
I believe my strengths concerning leadership is curiosity, attentiveness and high energy. As well as a clear and distinct focus and wish to proceed.
I have an ability to pay attention to the needs of individuals as well as the group and let that influence my way of communicating.
I believe in a joyful and personal approach towards both the chosen subject and the people working with it.
I am interested in exploring the balance between clarity/structure and openness. I hope to understand different methods of leadership and ways of communication. I also wish to obtain a greater self-assurance and confidence in my role as a leader.
I wish to apply my knowledge in both personal art projects, involvement in BL and future dreams involving events and community building of sexuality, art and movement.
16 8 F Monika Katharina Hagg k.hagg13@gmail.com Other Accepted For the past three years I’ve been co-organising Burning Baer as part of the core-team in different lead and co-lead roles. I’m also involved with the Norg (organisation of Nowhere) as part of NoInfo and Welfare, and this year’s ELS content team. Then there’s several smaller events and roles, e.g. workshopping the effigy for Ponyhof, being part of My Dick at Borderland, first an art project and now a camp at Burning Man… Co-organising Burns taught me a lot about channeling my ego. Organising the Burning Baer we have a lot of discussions about the form of organisation and leadership we’d like it to take shape. And we disagree a lot. Maybe it’s due to the form of the event though I know that Schoenburn achieves a way more open “white canvas” approach. Where KiezBurn learned a lot from Borderland, Burning Baer stays, in my opinion, way to centralised and closed. Which you can see during the event itself: People take less initiative and also less responsibility. It’s not really their event. I’d love to change that. It’s hard to explain in a few sentences, but I’ve noticed how much more open and including my “leading” has become, both at event organisation as well as in my normal profession: Outside of the Burner community I also work in the co-creative field: The past 6 years I taught urban design at the TU Berlin, focussing on post-participation (how to go from participation as it is done now to true co-creation in city making, how to give everyone the opportunity to take part and how to motivate people to actually do so) and I’ve just started to work for the city of Amsterdam as senior urban designer, where I hope to be part of the “Co-Create the City” programme and event. It all started with leading a small youth group at the scouts, ages ago. Already then I felt terribly uncomfortable in the role of an authoritarian leader. Probably because I feared the responsibility and everything that could go wrong. But also because even though the were 9 years old and I was 16, they should know what they were doing. I don’t make much difference if I talk to a child or an adult. We’re all just people after all. Still, after my studies at work I got thrown into becoming a project leader urban design right away in the different offices I worked for. Again I saw myself as one part of many, of a team and a bigger organism. Teaching at the university and different other educational facilities made me more aware of how important it is to me to not tell people what to do but to help them figure out themselves. To motivate, to inspire, and to ask the right questions.
In the Burn organisation as it has been done in Berlin so far, at least for Burning Baer, Kiez Burn is different, I think there needs to be more transparency and openness. Curious, creative, passionate, happy to get my hands dirty, stress-resistent, emphatic, organised if necessary, tenacious…
In Dutch there’s a culture called “Poldercultuur”, which comes from the continuous threat of being flooded: No matter what, we need to find a solution, we need to find it together and nobody will leave the table until we’ve agreed on a way to go forward that we can all live with. I absolutely believe in this: openness, honesty, continuous communication. Not the perfect solution, but one we can agree on and we can aal work with, to develop it further. In my different positions as “leader”, both at project work, in the office, as teacher and outside of work context, I know that I do not know everything, not even a big part. But I know how to ask, how to share. I want to learn constantly, I want to figure out the best way with everybody involved. In that sense I’m good at motivating people, at making them feel involved and heard. I’m very creative and curious and always strive to understand the full complexity of a situation and how different stakeholders are involved, what their motivations and goals are, when they’d leave the table. I’m good at finding a balance in the dynamic field of interests that every project is. At the same time I know that’s impossible to understand anything completely, and therefore I’ve learned to let go and let others take over, encourage it even. I hope I’ve gotten better at prioritising, but I know that I can be impatient, especially if I get passionate about something. Good at solving puzzles and bringing humour into any difficult situation. Last year I discussed the Agile Leadership principle with Chris, and I got very enthusiastic. But somehow I never got to really deepen my understanding of it. I would love to learn more, and to participate with my own knowledge and angle. I think that the Berlin Burners are very fragmentised and that one of the challenges is how we organise the different events. To build, strengthen, integrate the community in my opinion it’s necessary to find new ways and I’d love to learn from you and everybody involved in the program. Borderland (and Burnerrot) is very advanced in how “democratic” the events are organised, and I’d love to learn more about the methods, the thinking behind it and how to apply them in our context. I hope to apply it the different Burns I’m involved in, most urgently in the Berlin community, also within the Berlin Burner e.V., where I would love to share what I learn and let it spread. Besides that also in my everyday work, especially now working for a municipality I think it would be great to give some inspiration on a new type of leadership model, both within the organisation as well as with outside stakeholders, e.g. citizens in a participatory project. Also as Berlin Burner I try to get more involved with some city activists’ projects, organise an urban burn, open up the community to “normal” inhabitants and I think this program would be of enormous benefit to me and the association.
17 47 F Olivia Khan oliviaekhan@gmail.com BL Accepted
I was invited to an Unconference in May 2018 which was a co-creative event in a castle. This was my first experience of co-creation. I then participated in Nowhere and Borderland in that same year. I attended an art festival in Amsterdam that summer to support local self sustaining communities. I also run many events for young people as part of my job and actively try and encourage them to co-create with me.
This month (March) I will travel to Sweden to fluff and facilitate lots of programmers and idea fairies into giving the Dream Platform a fabulous makeover. Later in 2019 I have put a basic plan in place for an opportunity to visit Scotland for my international friends (Let me know if you wanna know more). This will be the first co-creative event I will have inspired myself. I will also be helping start a new camp at Nest, the UK’s regional burn. There I will run my first workshops and take my first lead role which I am BUZZING about! I am also supporting with the decision making around grant applications for Nest. I plan to support The Edge in Borderland with some crazy cool projects and workshops but also join a separate camp to have new experiences. I would love to join the Working Class Heroes for Borderland build and experience the magical flow state that happens there. I am actually writing my dissertation (thesis) on leadership. I chhose this topic as I was inspired by the co-creation experience and how it worked. I am a business student so a lot of what we learn is super old theory around how people are motivated. What I saw at Burns seemed contrary to everything I had learned in class.
Basically the main aim of my job is to improve outcomes for young people who have come through the care system and I am given a lot of freedom to decide how to do this. My team and I all have come through the care system too and I recognise my leadership skills most around them. I notice their ability to help me reduce the pressure on myself and combat my perfectionism and I recognise that by being solution-focused I help the team stay on target. I identify a lot with the archetype of a big sister and I want to be a great example for my care community. I try hard to show that vulnerability leads to deeper connections and illustrate that persistence can achieve great things.
I am particularly good in social situations and I am very affected by how others feel or present their feelings. I love to make people feel loved. I affectionately refer to myself as Princess Productivity as I am most comfortable with a long list of tasks to work through. I am a good facilitator of ideas (If that makes any sense) I like to help people explore ideas and focus them or broaden them for purpose.
I hope to learn more about leadership from the leaders that I want to be like. I want to be the type of person that can help others recognise and make use of their best self.
I hope to apply this to my personal life. I dislike sounding “preachy” and am paranoid that I patronise people so I’d like to learn more skills to help me feel more confident about this. I am about to graduate so I’d like this to feed into my professional career as I figure out where my gift would be best received. I feel as though I now have a third aspect to my life along with personal and professional and that is my burn life. Gifting is my favourite principle and I think a lot about what my gift is to the community. This has helped me think about my qualities in regards to their value which has been a real confidence booster and helped with feelings of social inadequacy
18 71 F Rosanna Ljungren rosanna.ljung@gmail.com BL Accepted I have attended burns regularly since new year’s 2016-2017. Mainly quite small ones and very much within the same community. So far I have not been very involved in the “large scale” organization of burns, other than at last years BLARP in Skåne, where I was very much in lead of the whole event. However, I feel very drawn towards this direction (hence this application). Considering the time in between burns, I have been quite active since 2018. When I moved to Malmö that year I founded an association aiming to fulfill the same means as the Node in Sthlm and the Lighthouse in Cph. As the chair of the board and the one who pulled a large part of the weight in creating events, channels for communications and taking important decisions, I have contributed to what the Malmö Node is today; a community with over 300 members and weekly events that gets more frequent and bigger all the time. I also started free flow there, which is now a very appreciated reoccurring event enjoyed by many new and old burners (it’s coming to Cph too, very soon! ;)). I have held dance workshops, warm up exercises and many introductions, so I’m used to being responsible for events, holding space and planning, but I don’t have a lot of experience with bigger organizations. Of course, I’ve led the progress of the Malmö Node, which I’ve learned a lot from. I also have some experience with project management from my work. My responsibility there involves running a nudging project with 7 big costumers. I’m good at getting people together, make them feel motivated, comfortable and excited. Linked to that, another personal strength that I receive compliments for is that it’s fun to be around me because I’m playful and “alive”. I’ve noticed that that makes co-creation projects easier and more pleasant. I’m also quite good at structuring and getting things done. I’d like to learn to become more comfortable and self-confident in my leadership. I truly think that the lack of empowerment is what keeps me from taking on more challenging roles at burns, at work and in life overall. It’s like, somewhere I know I can do it, but I don’t trust it yet. If this program helps me discover these dormant abilities in myself, I will use them to take on bigger organizing roles at burns, engaging more confidently in community building activities in Cph as well as owning my decisions and actions more in work life.
19 14 F Saga Rickmer saga.rickmer@hyperisland.se Other Accepted If going way back I was a scout for many years, loving to organize camps for the younger kids, coming up with themes and missions etc together with the others, building on ideas until having a full on adventure.
More recently I worked with a raw food shop where we created dinner experiences and ceremonies aiming to make the events into experiences for all senses. Reaching that level took many small ideas from all team members which we together developed into a full concept.
I’ve helped out coordinating at the Daybreakers events since they first launched in Stockholm and want to be even more involved in it. I get really motivated by the happiness and love that is created when people feel safe together and truly can be themselves. Everyone dancing without feeling stupid just because it's fun and adding glitter to their faces because it's awesome.
I'm currently on my last months of the 2 year Digital Media Creation education at Hyper Island, where we constantly work together in effective teams to solve problems and co-create solutions. At Hyper Island I've both learnt about different kinds of leadership and put it into practice by trying on different roles in teams and projects. I was the project manager at an 8 week long project where the team went through different stages and needed different kind of leadership.
During that time I had to balance managing both the needs of my team on 7 people with process work for how to work together and taking the temperature on the team, and also making sure the project was moving forward with all team members aligned. It was a big challenge on many levels, but very exciting as well being in a role with such a constant meta perspective on the team and the project.
I've also had lead in all other project I've participated in since being a leader necessarily isn't to be the outspoken leader.
However I feel that there is so much to explore and I wanna challenge myself into growing and learning as much as possible. I’m calm and self reflecting.
I know that a leader have many roles, not necessarily in the front all the time.
I’m intrigued by teams and the psychology behind it.
I’m good at listening and observing.
I think before I speak.
I know to actively put my self in stretch zones and be aware of when being there. I strongly believe that the future will be build by teams, as diverse as possible. I believe that companies will change their way of working and that the change will need leaders. I wanna be part of making this change, therefor I’m hungry for any opportunity to grow in my understanding and knowledge for how to best navigate in team development and leadership. It might sound cheesy but I really want to make the world happier and friendlier.
I'd love to be part of creating spaces where people can be themselves and have fun together. Therefor I want to learn how to better be part of co-creating such things and make larger things come to life. To be able to be part of pushing change forward and making good things happen.
20 58 F Ylva Björnberg ybjornberg@gmail.com BL Accepted Participant at Afterglow x2, then core team at Afterglowx1. Co-lead at Nordic Camp at Burning Manx2. Lead of Ascension2019. Also leading 2 small art camps, one for Urban Burn, one for Burning Nest 2019. Some above, the rest in default. Have been the leader a remote global team of 10 PR-managers, not directly reporting, creating common culture and systems from a place of silo/isolation. Currently work as project leader in strategy and brand consulting. I.e. I lead smaller teams. Energizer! I move people with passion and optimism. A client said "with you, the sky is not the limit". I also have an ability to pick up on people's emotions, which is both a strength and a weakness. I want to unlearn hierarchy thinking and embody co-created leadership so I can: 1) lead better at camps and events within the community 2) apply it in the default world. Today I integrate BM:s 10 principles in brand strategies for large organisations but I'm missing the piece of my own leadership. I'm hoping this program will help. Thanks for doing it. <3
21 21 F Aiyana Maria Bammeskov mariabammeskov@gmail.com Other Applied Co-creative communities is a new field to me that I am just tapping into and getting currious about exploring.
I have had a believe that I just need to deal with life on my own. Now, finally, I have started to change that perspective, as I realize and understand the true benefits and power of co-creating. I see this as the way for a true collective awakening. Gathering the tribe.
I have lived in sustainable communities in Costa Rica, Guatamala and Sweden where I assisted lots of workshops, retreats and ceremonies. So co-creating in a sense, I guess, but not really. Some years back I worked as a teamleader in a voluntary organization, training and supporting the voluntary staff in Copenhagen and in Sierra Leone. More recently I've been a teamleader and a campcoach working with teens around personal and social development on 5-day camps.
I studied Learning and Innovative Change at the University (quit right before my thesis) so have a more theoretical understanding about leadership than practical.
Personal leadership, however, is a whole different story, which I'd say I master quite well :) I am a guardian of the Earth. This is my passion, my mission and my personal strenght. First and foremost.
I am good with people. Good at creating a space where people feel safe and can see themselves more clearly. I'm a little awakener of consciousness. A ceremonial alchemist. Practicing connecting my intend to the intent of the Greater.
I have an eagles perspective of the space I am engaging with. Which makes me a good leader, as I'm aware of everything that's going on, while I know - and takes care of, what needs to be done. I apply to learn more about leadership in co-creative projects. I am part of different platforms where we intend to create events and gatherings. As I dont know so much about this yet, I am basicially just currious and hugry to learn more. Especially the practical skill training.
I will be part of the Tempel of Visions at Borderland this year and hope to apply it there. I am also creating retreats and ceremonies and hope that I can use what I learn in this area as well, so it can develop and work on a larger scale in the future.
I am all about growth and learning.
22 50 F Alina Abelianova abelianova@gmail.com Other Applied I've initiated and co-run a camp two years in a row at the still small and young Berlin/German regional burn: KiezBurn. 22 people our first year, double the size at 44 the second. We are going into the 3rd year of KiezBurn in 2019. I am personally taking a break from co-leading the camp. I would like to return to absorbing and learning (from others) in 2019, so that I can re-apply my renewed drive and desire to create and co-lead in 2020. An experience that exhilarated me. But also challenged an exhausted me. I've come up against my personal limitations. I've been frustrated and torn. I've been exalted and carried on the wings of love. It's been a truly mixed bag of equally big success and failures that told me: "Alina, you need to learn more about this. There are intelligent, experienced people you could learn from - in order to do this again, but without burning out." And then, there came this program :))) Vision, creativity, do-attitude, clarity, ability to inspire, orga/project management skills, and a bottomless drive to keep creating this unique "burning"-inspired experience and environment for others. People skills mainly, meaning how.... to rally beautiful, capable, burning hippies around one vision; how to inspire people to dream but then actually - work - together in a very flat, non-hierarchical setting. How to collectively work through challenges - in a most cooperative, fruitful and friction-less way possible. How to become a kind of a leader that leads by inspiring and empowering others to both dream and do.
23 28 F Anna Lotte Eliasson aeliasson@weberstephen.com Other Applied I participated in my first burn (burning man) in 2017, and ended up going to a second one (small regional burn in the swedish woods called Afterglow) only a few months later. I got so engaged with the whole spirit of creating something magical and constructive with driven people and helped out organizing the Urban Burn in Stockholm in April of 2018. I then took on a lead as a Radical Included in the Nordic Camp for Burning Man 2018, and since then I've only had the fortune of being invited to smaller decompression gatherings with my friends. But the co-creative environment is something I have realized really calls me, and I am integrating it into my working habits and "default"-life in order to make more people understand how true teamwork can make wonders. Aside from the co-creative task I have taken on during the Burns I mentioned above I do not have much experience of leadership. I sometimes end up taking the lead for a group due to the fact that I might come across as comfortable with being the leader, but I sometimes feel like I would need more knowledge about leading a group in order to do a better job. I often manage to avoid taking things personal when working in groups under circumstances where people sometimes act and talk in affect. I also have some talent for putting my ideas into words, and communicate with people coming from different backgrounds. As I mentioned earlier I sometimes end up leading groups, not because I know how to but simply because people seem to feel comfortable with me as a leader. I therefor feel obliged to educate myself in this art in order to do a better job when leading. I hope this can lead to even greater success in every situation where I take on the task of managing and guiding individuals.
24 68 F Annie Locke Scherer Annie.locke.scherer@gmail.com BL Applied Burning man ‘14,16,18
Borderand ‘16,17
Ascension/afterglow/spark in the dark etc Project management of 40k self budgets for Borderland projects 2016/17 Getting shit done Always room to learn! Hence me being in higher education for the better part of a decade
25 6 F Athéna-Morgane Beinert athena.morgane@gmail.com Other Applied In terms of events:
I first got in contact with co-created events through BL in 2015. Even though I was part of the Rabbit Hole camp, it felt challenging for me to know exactly how to participate beforehand. However, I was advised to look into the Clown Police shifts if I wanted to actively participate and co-create during the week. So I took my role as Clown Police during the week as very important and took 3 shifts.
Urban Burn 2016 - I participated actively in the creation process of the Aqua Booth and more specifically in the social aspect of it: gathering people, exposing and promoting (online and irl) the project for people to join, organising meetings for the Aqua Booth. Active with the Exit.
Borderland 2016: involved with the Rabbit Hole for the second year. More active on the organisational side. Clown Police.
At Crème Brûlée 2017, I contributed with a co-created sculpture and it was the first time I 'built' a structure. Before I had created more props or visuals but never a structure/sculpture. Although it was very amateur, it was a great feeling to create and share in a new way.
Also active with Gate Greeting.
Borderland 2018: Camp lead of Camp Coming Home. Gathering a core group, organising recurrent meetings, defining leads, motivating the group, explaining and including new comers and virgins.
In terms of community: I have been active in the Node since the beginning. Participated quickly in the deconstruction and then have been mostly participating to events and promoting them to my network. My leadership experience has expressed through:
\* Private events (workshops and parties for association I’m part of, a few workshops I held),
\* Professionally with tour leading and guiding groups of tourists,
\* Camp lead at BL,
The occasions in which I used my leadership had mostly to do with fun things. The people I was leading were either on holidays or participating in creating a recreational event with me (workshops, camps).
My leadership has expressed mostly through a yin leadership where I’m trying to understand the Other’s position and motivation to come and reinforce it and emphasise it. I have no experience in leading a team for financial result/business purposes. I believe my personal strengths are the positivity I am able to spread around me, how I can share my fire, desire and motivation for a project to the people I come into contact with. My speech and behaviour are contagious; they are positively influencing others to take action in the same direction as me.
Another personal strength of mine is a certain sense of compassion - I am able to listen and understand what my audience is sharing with me. I hope to learn a more strategic, structured and rational side of leadership that would naturally complement the yin leadership. I would like to develop a more assertive and confident side to me, in the position of leader.
I hope to apply the skills I would learn from the program for a specific personal project which is developing a meeting place in Gothenburg like the (late) Node in Stockholm, the Lighthouse in Copenhagen, or the Node in Malmö. As a new resident of Gothenburg, I felt I was missing a gathering place for participatory culture, creativity, self development and education, manifested through workshops, lectures, parties, dinners, etc.
26 38 F Cemile Saidova cemile.saidova@gmail.com BL Applied I have been attending co-creative events, festivals and gatherings alike since my frist co-creative event Burning Man in 2011. Since then I have been an active participant within BL community, local initiatives in Malmö and slowly transitioning to adopt this approach both in my work and private family life. Since my first Burning Man experience I have started to take more initatives and organise people around projects and ideas. My leadership has mostly been fueled by passion, inspiration and a will to make ideas come to life. For example the Foxhole at Borderland 2017 and 2018. However, when ideas and projects gets more complex I realise that there is more to leadership than just spreadsheets, organisational structure and to motivate people. The project ended up being too intense, that many of its core-leads where burned out. Here I realise that we could have benefited from another approach, one that was more inclusive and easier for others to join in.
Overall, many of the projects I have been involved with have been ”safe” in a way. Either that I know many people beforehand or that its concentrated to a specific area. In the past I have held myself back from taking on leadership roles if it required me to plan from geographical distance or if it required me to communicate to too many external organisations. Therefore I feel that I would benefit from a leadership development course where I can learn the necessary means to expand my comfort zones and feel confident to take on larger roles and projects.
My ability to always examine myself, understand how I perform and self-evaluate my own performance. I am constantly trying to improve myself and expand my comfort zones by undertanding how I function and operate with different people and situations. I wish to expand my comfort zones and this year be part of leading one of the biggest ”camps” at Borderland, the Clown Police. This role will require me to communicate to the community at large, communicate with many other internal organisations within BL and maybe even external actors. This will also require me to organise on a bigger scale, be geographically distant and mostly interact with people that Ive never met before. I am hoping this development course will equip me with both ”hard” and ”soft” skills such as both practical advice and methods while also challening me in ways to build up my confidence.
27 59 F Chloé Nicolet-dit-Félix chloefelix@gmail.com Other Applied I enjoy to share my skills and passion and often instigates workshops or events, where the purpose is to create moments of creative exchange, to bring people together, and to generate reflection.
I have being imagining and developing workshops and creative projects in many communities around the world. Some of the projects are on this blog: https://storiesfromhomehere.wordpress.com/
I love to work in the public space and I love to work with recycled materials. My main medium of exploration is photography.
Lately I have worked mostly with children and adults with a migration background, in asylum seeker reception centres in Switzerland. I have developed and managed projects from the conception to the realisation.
I collaborate with other artists and creative people, to initiate moments of artistic exchanges. I really like more collaborating then leading.
I am still a bit unsure to be a leader, but often I am, in some way. Not sure why? Maybe enthusiasm, curiosity and hyper activity. I am a creative and kind woman who strives to make my surrounding a space where people can feel accepted and valued, where exploration and self expression is encouraged and respect for every sentient beings and our precious earth is primordial. I want to meet and exchange with other people and consolidate my skills. I hope to gain some tools to continue to create together. I hope to be able to transmit the vibe of BL communities through project in places where colour and creativity is much needed. I also hope to have clear vision about myself, my dreams and my motivation. I would also like to co create a Borderland project.
28 4 F Dewi Katrine Thomsen Dewi-kt@hotmail.com BL Applied My closest and most awesome experiences with co-creating is from the burner community, and I LOVE IT!
My first burn was refraction, the new years burn 18/19. The atmosphere and the way of interacting with people was not new to me. The burning community makes me feel home. I really enjoyed and felt comfortable and relaxed in the co-creating space where everyone takes part in responsibility.
Apart from the burner community, I'm in the board of a spiritual summer island camp (drejø ølejr), which is build on flat structure and co-creating.
I'm very excited and fascinated of experiencing the energy flow and magic that emerge when we co-create.
How human interactions can create beautiful things together. As said I'm in the board of this summer camp, where we act as a form of leaders, we hold the frame and push the wheels so they can get rolling.
I've been working with permaculture and leading a few smaller projects, on Møn and in Thy.
It was through permaculture I was inspired to start thinking of working with people and it woke my interest in group dinamics, co-creation with people, and what it mean to lead.
The projects I've been leading has been some very good experience and projects I've dived into and said yes to without any experience of leading.
I'm eager to learn and grasp more of the concept of being a co-creative leader.
I'm super freaking good at communicating, honestly, transparent, non-violant with a huge amount of authenticity, empathy and listening.
I'm very soft, and understanding.
Adjusting and still be myself (bringing out the sides of me that fits to the setting/crowd)
And facing/adapting to change.
Feeling into the energy of the room/group and find the flow.
I'm very good at going with the flow.
Creating structure in unstructured things
Self reflection and self awareness -Seeing my inner self, patterns and behaviours , and the ability to change through the awareness.
I'm honest.... and usually makes others feel safe, comfortable and relaxed.
I'm good at holding space and helping others. Mostly help them to help them self, or help them to realise what they need to realise.
I'm good at having a meta perspective on situations.
I'm really good at describing and speaking out my feelings, thoughts and reflections.
I mean.... I have so many strengths, just as everyone else. So this is a few of them, the ones which are the most obvious to me right now.
Strengths and weaknesses sometimes /usually have both sides to them, depending on how they are used.
This program sounds just like what I need at this time of my life process!
I'm in a deep process of wanting to share knowledge and help people, in different ways.
Therapy, talks, workshops, relationships, polyamory, patterns, thoughts and communication.
I really feel that a program like this can help me gain more confidence in myself, to live out my dreams and make new things sprout in me to discover new dreams and opportunities.
Learning more about co-creating and leading -combined, I'm sure can give me so much more or work with.
And it would give me more confidence to join leadership tasks at burns, which I would love to contribute to!
So I will apply it to my personal life, for helping others and creating workshop and sustain myself.
And I would use it to contribute to the community, which I feel I really want to. (When the creation of new burns is announced I really feel like joining and help with the organising)
I hope to learn much more about myself, how to navigate in and handle the space of co-creative leadership and organising.
I have a very deep excited and committed feeling towards participating in this program.
So every crossable thing is crossed ;)
29 49 F Inbal partel Inbalpartel29@gmail.com BL Applied I'm participating at midburn from 2014, beeing part ot the production at mapatz teem (dpw), I had diffrend rools at leading mapatz, I was part of the jenoratior was the logistic maneger.
Out side of burns I had few event that I was mostly was logistic maneger. And love to put up community event all the time. I hope I understood the question correctly.
I enjoyed leading and caring for the volunteers and making the city's construction experience / community volunteering / fundraising event different, fun and seeable.
Sometimes I had difficulties and challenges that were solved when I shared my team and together we found a solution.
I am a calm person (most of the time)
And assertive, my voice is pleasant and my approach is inviting and open, I know how to combine fun and work that needs to be done
This combination creates a power that people like to listen to, help, and harness.
I notice the small details (sometimes more than the big picture), but most of the time, the combination of seeing the big picture with attention to detail makes all the difference. And these are two things that I know I have and that people love me very much. This program calls on me to come and learn more about communication between people, how to deal with challenging situations in front of a community in combination with action.
I would also like to learn how to integrate the lead in my private life and see how I create projects that interest me in integrating the community, together.
Get to know more special people!
Open myself up to more new adventures and take part in this wonderful event called Borderland.
30 29 F Maria-Ursula Kurm mariakurm@gmail.com Other Applied I have been part of the team organising Estonian Burners events for the last 5 years. This has been an amazing experience - I have learnt a lot of things from cooking and bartending to event-planning, building, management and co-creation in general. I have also helped organise other festivals and events. For four summers, my friends' group organised our own festival in the Estonian countryside for our circle. The maximum amount of people there was only a hundred, but it was also a really great experience. Some of the best memories were created there. Most of my leadership experience is connected to youth work. I have been the group leader in different youth projects and I've also been a teacher in summer camps. I have some experience in teaching as well, which is similar to leading a team in some respects. I am detail-oriented, empathic and super-sensitive (which can be both a strength and a weakness). I am creative, musical, kind and easy-going. I always see the best in people and want everyone to get along. My personality type can be described as 'the mediator', which I have had the role of also in many situations. I always try to look at the big picture and focus on the things that are important in life. I would like to have a push to come out of my shell more and apply these strengths that I know are in me to make the life of my community better, more connected and co-creative. I would apply the learnt skills locally, in my own community of lovely people to remind everyone how we're all in this together and how we can create amazing things, when we dare to.
31 39 F Milène Balligand milene.balligand@gmail.com Other Applied I lived in several co-creative agricultural communities for 4 months (2016 - 2017). I was there as a Wwoofer (see https://wwoofinternational.org/) because at this time I planned to run such a project and I wanted to gain experience in agriculture and craft. At the end, what I got the most interested in were all the issues and dynamics of living in community.
I also took part to two regional burn events last summer (Nowhere and Borderland). At Nowhere I was membert of a brand new camp (In Now We Trust) and I participated to the preparation, building and the disassembly of it. I'm quite young (24 y.o) and I cannot say that I actually have any leader experience.
Indeed, I have natural leader skills, and
I have always been a structuring element for the groups I have been part of ; but I never actually dared to take the responsability of leading projects. Today I want to reinforce these skills and begin to co-lead different projects. I have two main strenghts.
First, I'm an enthousiastic dreamer and I know how to share my vision with others. When I really believe in something, I become very charismatic and I spread a highly contagious energy. I know that I could have been a lawyer, because I have fine litterary and oral abilities, and I know how to perceive and convince an audience.
The second point is that I have a very developped emotional intelligence (psychological tests categorize me as a supersensitive person. I precise that contrarily what people usually think, it doesn't make me more fragile, but able to perceive more). It gives me a high level of empathy and great skills of communication. I know how to manage both collective and individual energies, even in conflictual situations. I practice Non Violent Communication and I want to learn other methods of mediation. I want to reinforce and complete my natural skills in order to feel more legitimate to lead teams and collective projects.
I have a vision of the "good leader" and I want to embody it. This leader is the one who is aware of all the group dynamics and knows how to keep the energy flowing. In ordrer to work with and alive and sensitive group, and create an enriching experience for everyone.
I have many desires of leading co-creative projects in the near future. I still want to run a project of a collective artistic farm. I also want to co-organize actions of political and environmental resistance in France where we really need it. To do so, I will take part to the "Climate Camp" organized by the association Alternatiba in France this summer. It is a co-created camp where people share skills and get trained to organize and take part to environmental /political collective actions.
And of course, I would love to apply these leadership skills in future burns, such as Nowhere, Crème Brûlée or Borderland. Until now I was discovering burn universe and my own self ; but now I really want to get commited in the community.
32 27 F Petra Zumbach petra.zumbach@gmail.com Other Applied co-creator poolloop festival, zürich
co-creator les digitales, zürich
late board member of sgmk, mechatronicart.ch
late former of the agency actioncy.ch for workshops after doing lots of co-creative organizing of small to semi-small festivals and events, as if museomix and so on, while being part of the DIY-culture, I started working as headmistress last summer. also since last summer I startet a CAS in leadership for an educational institution. I also have 9 years experience teaching. trying to be on same eye level as my stuff, but kick asses kindly but directly if its for the case. leave out personal feelings. being big hearted, most of the time. dance the tango with my personal issues and fears.
And I am very gifted in many things. Could also end up as singer, painter, clown, actress, CEO, president, clochard ... I'm not interested to step up in borderland organization, since I visit the legendary place in time the first time this year and just made a cut in all my co-creative activities for now. but I want to evolve my personality for my complex job, extend my perception, fulfill my decisions with creativity, give my knowlege and exchange with other people that are at a similar point in life.
33 20 F Rosa Danenberg Rosadanenberg@gmail.com BL Applied I've participated in BL since three years. I've also participated in an Oasis Game by Elos foundation. In my work as an urban planner I've worked with co creation. Last year at Borderland I was head of a camp. Otherwise I've experience with leadership roles in my work as urban planner such as workshop leader and member of co creative teams. My personal strengths are communication, mediation, contributing with analytical insights, positive thinking and trying to lift others while I follow my intuition and tend to structure processes towards goals and outcomes. I am stoked about the combination of learning the theory and the practice in combination with personal development and to do all of this with other people. I hope to apply this to future collaborations in any kind and hopefully to bring this back to BL community. Leading a camp last year with just newbies and a large project was challenging and I would like to reflect on what I could have done better and learn how to do that next time. I also see it as an opportunity to spread co creation to other parts of society and in work related processes such as urban planning.
34 52 M Anton Dalsmo adalsmo@gmail.com BL Accepted \* Initiated Mikrofabriken, a co-created do-ocracy makerspace which, 3 years on, has 50 members and a workshops covering 900m2. With a decentralised organisation it is my main source of inspiration and 'test-bench' for building community and experimenting with organisations.
\* Two years of borderland and one afterglow. latest borderland was spent with working class heroes, doing power-systems, rebar and generally helping out. Took power-lead shifts during the end of the event to of-load the official lead.
\* Going horizontal training, a 4 day retreat in horizontal organisation co-created by participants and facilitators around the book going horizontal.
\* Board member Mikrofabriken 3 years, just retired this year. www.mikrofabriken.se
\* Lead a 16 person software team during the buildup and final crescendo of deployment of an internal service at a large software company.
\* Auktion lead for 3 years at ETA-auktionen, auktion.eta.chalmers.se . Day-plan, Logistics coordination, handling customers, crowd control, unplanned incidents, and Strike. Handling the chaos of when events actually start to unfold. Delimitating between what is actually important and what can be omitted because of constraints. Keeping an eye on future potential issues, and reserving resources for them, while still fighting the current fire. All the while pacing myself and those around me to keep calm and do the tasks at hand without over stretching ourselves ore risking accidents. I try to remember that any undertaking is usually a marathon, there will be more fires to fight around the corner.
I consider myself good at taking unplanned leadership roles and finding the voids that arise as the system progresses. Those roles are often varied with an absence of information or preparation by the over all organisation. Where no one else was intended to go, or considered needed beforehand, that is where I love to be.
Finally I like working in teams, hence I am always building teams around myself. Usually it starts with a bit of trust and from there the process is quite swift. I have gotten good att forming teams through doing it again and again.
Add a bit of humor, som esoteric knowledge and a lot of curiosity, and you have basically got me. To me BL is the most awe-inspiring organisation/organism that I know of and I'd like to learn from those who have shaped it before me. Having the opportunity to geek out and compare with other organisations I have been involved in would be fantastic.
I hope to better understand how one acts in a co-created organisation. To me, there is a concept of acting out the best version of an intended norm as a way to manifest the culture one wishes to have. I have done this, but I feel there is much more I can do and I wish to be that good steward of culture in all contexts where i participate. But this takes time, studying and dedication, this program ticks all those boxes.
35 30 M Axel Hansers axelhansers@gmail.com BL Accepted I went to BL my first time in 2017 and have since attended a number of other smaller and larger burns. My first time I and a friend went after hearing about it on a podcast as well as from another friend and it sounded too interesting to not check out. The reasons I decided to come back and start to engage more, however, was the people as well as the general atmosphere at these events, with which I literally fell in love.
I have had the somewhat unfortunate luck of being located in Umeå (due to school) during most of this time. But as this is something I am working on to change I hope to be able to spend a lot more time in Stockholm in the somewhat near future. This change is mainly to become more invested in and to be able to contribute more to the burner community because I feel that it has already given me so much. My leadership experience is somewhat scattered, I have worked as a teacher for younger people 6-14 as well as at University level, and this has given me the opportunity to interact with a lot of different people and wills across a wide range of subjects, leading to me becoming a good diplomat and finding some comfort in the role as a leader.
My time at University and as an Intern has provided me with the opportunity to work in many smaller projects, on different boards and in the different class tasks, both as a leader as well as a team member. This has given me an exposure of different leadership styles, as well as time to try on some of these for myself making me start to recognize some different parts that I believe make up a good leader.
During the varying experiences at the 7 Burns that I have attended, I have never formally had any leading roles. I have, however, worked with some great leaders and most of all these have served to challenge me to become a much better leader of myself. I have realized where I have limitations and need to ask for help as well as at what areas I excel and that it is not just okay but actually good to feel competent at the areas that I am. As I feel a part of being a leader is knowing what you know and do not know is important I guess that I would count this as an experience. I am starting to become quite knowledgeable when it comes to how we humans work, as this is something I have spent considerable time researching both in and out of school.
I am easy to get along with, there are very few people that I do not manage to find common ground with.
I am good at taking care of myself, something I believe is essential before someone is to take care of someone else.
I am good at recognizing patterns, both in social (people) and non-social (things) settings.
I am good at idea-bridging and finding a middle way due to my varied interests, work experiences and fields of study.
I am good at learning new (mainly theoretical) things.
I am patient and calm, with myself and others and tend not to lose my temper. I would like to be a part of the program because I believe that a good leader, a person who is good at bringing forth great teamwork is essential to make great ideas come into the realm of reality, and that is something I am passionate about. I would also like to do it because of my knowledge set from school in regards to people and how they work has mainly been focused on the level of the individual, and since I believe that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts I would like to understand groups as a whole to make them function better.
What I hope to learn is when to push and when to lay off, I feel that most of the ways that I have been leading have been on the "lay off" and putting more of an emphasis on communication and everyone's well being. This is something I feel is very valuable to be able to do as a leader but at the same time, I have come to see that at some times, the leader also has to be the one who is able to stand up and say what everyone signed up to do and to make them do it.
I have a great memory of this from Burning Man where I and a few others had been working hard filling the truck on the day of leaving when another group of the camp took to much time off just sitting and panting in the shade. This is something that I felt was understandable since I recognize that everyone is not as fit to be performing physical labour in the sun, especially not after a whole week spend at Burning Man. But at the same time, us working could tell that if we kept at it at the pace we were doing things we would not make ends meet. This is when a member of the group (Ebbe for some of those that know him) did a great act, he went up on the trucks loading deck, told everyone to gather around and said exactly what he felt, that if we kept this pace we would be in trouble and he implemented a time-based work / rest schedule and this was the act that made it all work out in the end.
I suppose this, the push, is the main thing I would like to learn, but I also believe that there are a lot of skills and tricks that I have yet to be exposed to or hear of that are valuable when it comes to leadership since this seems to be the case in every aspect of life. So, I would also like to learn what I do not yet know that I need to learn.
When it comes to implementation I would first do it for our camp at BL this year, me and two friends have decided to start a Lost & Found camp where we aim to provide services and host events. We are yet to decide how big of a camp we will be but most likely around 15 - 20 people so this will be requiring some level of infrastructure, planning and execution.
When it comes to the future I hope to be situated in Stockholm by this time next year. So I believe these skills and this knowledge would serve well in helping me to take on other larger responsibilities and create more for the community in the long run.
36 24 M Carl Strandby carl.strandby@gmail.com BL Accepted I am a member of the Node in Stockholm, and have been to BL, Afterglow and Subsecular Arts: Forest Interface. My previous job was as a ombudsman for the social democratic youth league in Skaraborg, Sweden. There I was responsible for all the operations. SSU evolved to be a tricky and multi-faceted school for leadership. It required being politically savvy, developing young people who could step up and take on responsibilities and, since I had no set work hours, learning how to lead yourself.
I was tasked with the goal of increasing the number of members in our division. Over the course of two years I planned a dozen or so educational weekend events for new members, learned how to "sell" a membership, inspire new leaders to step up and managing the political relationships with Socialdemokraterna and other divisions. We managed to grow and more than doubled our membership numbers during my 2 years of employment. Yet, I still feel like I failed.
Yes, this is a cliffhanger! The saga continues under d! Personally, I am very proud over my ability to quickly sketch a plan and create the initial framework for how to initiate and progress a project. An example of this is when I got in touch with Paul Lloyd Robson asking if there was something I could help with before the European Mens Gathering 2018. With one month before the event I managed to organize seven discussion salons to be held at the gathering.
My friends would describe me as easygoing, supportive, happy and trustworthy. Past colleagues have expressed their appreciation for having me on their team. Reasons given have been my positive attitude to challenges and my ability to handle heavy workloads. Although I suspect my tendency to volunteer for manual labour might have something to do with it. Today, roughly six months after I quit my job for SSU Skaraborg, the division is struggling and back in the same old rut and the same old patterns. I had learned how to lead down the chain of command and thanks to my biggest role model in leadership, Jocko Willink, I got very effective at leading up the chain of command. But I did not succeed in changing the culture which is the only type of change that can lead to a long term impact.
This is what Co-creative leadership means for me. What you are co-creating is a culture that allows and encourages well functioning independent units to work together towards a shared vision or goal. To do this the old way of practicing leadership won't suffice. I am very thankful for having had the experience I had with SSU and seeing it play out. After all it became a very valuable lesson. Having realized this is why I want to join the co-creative leadership program and learn everything I can about co-creative leadership.
The lessons from the Co-creative leadership program is something i hope to apply to all areas of life. I want to help develop co-creative leadership at BL. I have applied to be a member of the Sanctuary Core team and am crossing my fingers I will be accepted. If the stars align that is where I hope to apply as much as the lessons from the leadership program as possible.
Professionally, I'm currently assisting Paul Lloyd Robson with the European Men's Gathering 2019 which is an event I hope will develop into becoming more co-creative. Hopefully I will also get the opportunity to apply the lessons in a student environment as I want to start my studies in Stockholm this autumn. With a little luck this will allow me to help out at Blivande as well!
37 63 M Christian Ubbesen christian@ubbesen.se BL Accepted Foxhole at Borderland 2017 and 2018
Nordic Camp at Burning Man 2017 and 2018
Burning Man Week 2017
Various micro-burns and burner parties
Syntheist Node board 2017-today
Supporting the creation of Blivande I have had a traditional job during approx. 10 years as a manager in the IT industry, where I were involved in all the various processes and in different levels in the traditional hierarchy. At this company we explored ways of co-creation and employee engagement and I have both positive and negative experiences from these processes.
When entering the burner community in 2017 I quickly became super fascinated of the high quality of leadership in the community and have involved myself in various projects during the last two years. I'm a solid down-to-earth person with high-flying visions. I'm seen as a rock by others, someone to lean against. I'm an analytical strategist and a large-perspective systems thinker that can take in various aspects of a subject and use intuition to find a constructive way forward. The burner community have changed the way I am and see the world in a very positive way, and I want to be able to contribute back much more than I do today, for instance by taking on more leadership roles at BL.
I'm also curious about how the cocreative culture and processes can be used in other parts of society, for instance in our democratic processes or in a regular business.
With my management experience I should be able to mentor and coach other participants, and I have so much to learn from others regarding participatory culture and grass-root processes.
38 33 M Fabian Unghanse fabian@unghanse.se BL Accepted My experience with co-creating communities and events is that you always end up with the result you should have instead of the one you aimed for.
As a co-creative leader, I just unload my idea and describe the project to my fellow creators than I just make sure they are happy and stays away from their work and when I come back, I can see how my idea have been elevated to so much more than I ever expected. I try to the same when a co-creative leader tells me their idea.
It sounds very easy and it can be this easy, but it requires a few skills and certain mind set.
I’ve been to numerous burns and do many co-creative projects such as camp at Borderland, placement and dance floor at Urban Burn, dance experience at After Glow. A side of Burns I run this party at a commercial club where I intend and apply as much co-creation philosophy as possible.
I always liked to plan stuff. I might not always been a leader but for the passed years I have grown as a person and filled my tool box so I feel comfortable as a leader. Today after a few successful and some failed projects I now feel I want to become not only a leader but a good leader, a loved leader. My leader experience is a combination from very top down projects to totally horizontal projects.
I love co-creation and since I’m willing to admit that there are more stuff other people are better than me on, than stuff I’m better than other people on. I have found that for me to be happy and a project I lead to succeed I should focus on creating a space where my co-creators feel happy and free and everything will unfold magical. To ensure that the team feel happy and free the leader has a huge responsibility and these responsibilities might seem boring but I want to evolve myself to pick up these areas and sort them with joy.
I dream big and know that anything is possible.
I’m kind and empathetic while also willing to trust in people. I have a high level of education and quite well-informed while both street smart and adventurous on the border to naive. I know myself and will admit my limits so I can prevent them from limiting me. I’m creative but haver no problems with give my ideas away and let someone else make it come to life, even if the are not doing as I envisioned it. I have recently released the power in delegation and how to make this in a nice way. I hope and believe I can read situations well and can see early if a person is struggling or not having fun.
I like to lead and intend to do so in the future, but I want to develop! I want to become a more trusted and loved leader; one people want to work with. I want to learn more tools to engage and inspire my team but also learn how to better take care of the Boring stuff in a project such as all the admin and paper work.
39 13 M Gustav Bodell gustav.bodell@gmail.com Other Accepted The burner community was my introduction to co-creation on a larger scale.
Borderland 2015 - Part of a camp, helping out, trying to understand what was going on, being blown away.
Borderland 2016 - Freecamper doing spontaneous things, helping out with different projects like the Cabaret and the Burn.
Borderland 2017 - Gathering a group of freecampers into a camp, doing smaller building projects, growing the idea of a more “proper” camp next time.
Borderland 2018 - Organizing, with others, my first camp with about 25 people. Erecting an home-made awesome tent for workshops, talks, mischief.
The Village 2019 - Being core team and initiating a smaller burn in the forests of Sweden, taking a more active leadership role for the first time. Lead on dream grants, placement and guide to the membership lead. Forming the vision and building a community.
When not participating in burns, I live in a small village 100km outside Gothenburg. Here low budget co-creation is the way things get done. People growing food together, building a village sauna, organizing a DIY bike workshop, village festivals, building a tiny house village and so on.
Be it burns or not, doing things together with others with a shared goal often brings up the same feelings, situations and challenges. How do we make everyone feel included, how do we motivate each other, how do we solve conflicts, how do we deal with leadership and distribute workload and so on. Questions I have no clear answer to but often ask myself.
My first experience with serious leadership was when I formed an visualization company nine years ago, where I’m now in the board of directors. Leading projects, coaching workmates, having client meetings. Pretty straight forward and often well defined roles, but I often found myself wondering why we did like we did. In what way hierarchies helped us, and when and how they did not, and how we could change that.
When it comes to leadership in co-created situations I have not much leadership experience from the burner community, but from smaller contexts, starting cultural associations, bike kitchen or makerspace. Situation where I often end up in a leadership role, but would rather have a more decentralized organization with workload more evenly distributed. My struggle is to find the right balance between doing everything by myself because they need to be done (and done my way) and therefore getting too much to do, and delegating things, encouraging self action. My personal strengths when it comes to leadership is my positive approach and my ability to listen. I also value transparency and open discussions, and I think people feel that I don't do what I do because of personal gain or hidden agendas, being quite unassuming and grounded. I’m good at seeing the bigger picture and have good analytical skills. I hope to learn how to better help people find motivation and coach them in a good way, how to build a community, and how to better understand myself in a leadership role. How to work in decentralized organisations and to feel more confident as someone taking lead on stuff. How to make others feel like they also can be a leader!
As a core team member of The Village, this is where I wish to apply my skills and ways of leading, coaching and co-creating a new burn. It can feel a bit overwhelming at times, but I also get wildly enthusiastic and happy when I see how things start to live and take form with the help of other great people getting involved in the event. This Co-Creative Leadership Development Program showed up right on time! :D
40 26 M Henrik Klasson klasson.henrik@gmail.com BL Accepted Since the summer of 2016 I have made several experiences of Borderland and other smaller burns (50-400 ppl), in which I have partaken in planning and running camps of 10-30 ppl in size, as well as worked with the organization of the First Aid-part of the Sanctuary and art projects.
In life, I lead in three areas and on three level:
\*I lead myself (personal level);
I do and practice this through yoga, where I push myself to learn new things, to go a little further and deeper with an explorative and curious mind, and a compassionate attitude. I believe that I can only lead others as well as I can lead myself - leading by example.
\*I lead a team (group with clear roles, “close circle of friends”-level);
As a doctor I am the leader of a team of various competences, where we have opportinuty to pool our knowledge and perspectives to benefit the care of the patient, be it at a ward, the out-patient clinic or the emergency room (different settings with different stress levels/time frames).
\*I lead a group (group with sometimes unspecified roles, general level);
- I teach students , where I am expected to plan and structure the learning environment to create the potential for deep learning as well as experiential knowledge gathering. This requires a plan (an overall framework) and ability to adapt the teaching setting to suit both the individual as well ass the group, when their level of skill has been assessd in the moment.
- In the burn context I have taken on some minor-leading roles when structuring art projects and camps, as well as the First Aid-part of the Sanctuary, there working with a group with a lot of will to create a great experience, even in unfortunate situations. My ambition in these settings is to facilitate the direction of the energy towards the shared goal.
Ability to assess a situation (organize and structureise), identify possibilities, then choosing a road forward and execute the plan.
My will to learn new things; which in the leadership context is applied by me practicing acceptance - seeing the situation for what it is - in order to make the described chain above stronger and energy-efficient. This I practice by encouraging feedback, as well as feed-forward, while also allocating time to reflect upon and discuss experienced situations.
To communicate better as well as taking in the thoughts, feelings and advice from the group. I have noticed that I am seek to establish clear leadership, which has a tendency to mutate into dominant leadership (risk of tyrany instead of just ruler), thus hindering the group development process where all participants both can and feel empowered to take on various roles in various situations.
It is my intention and wish to learn and develop these qualities, which I hope to apply in the ongoing work with the Sanctuary (this year I have taken the lead on First Aid - rise to the occassion!), as well as in team leader role/teacher role as a medical doctor at a teaching hospital.
41 70 M Jonas Näslund naslund.jonas@gmail.com Other Accepted In my youth I took initiative to several larps, have been part of some performance theatres and have hosted some non-commercial techno/art cocreation parties with the goal of creating a shared community that was something more than just a party culture.
This was before I came
